HARIHAR MAJUMDER, Jyotishshastri, B.A.,LL.B.(Cal),A.C.I.I.(Lond,)
HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE

Publisher - R. K. Saha, Puthipatra (Calcutta) Private Limited, 9 Anthony Bagan Lane, Calcutta 700 009
First Published, April 1981 Reprinted, September 1983 Revised Print, January 2000
Scanned, OCRd Curated by Prithwis Mukerjee for Parashar21 Project
22 September 2026 - The Equinox
-------------------------------------------------------------------


Foreword
In our time, the study of astrology was limited to only a certain section of people who were profound scholars and who studied deeply the various branches of Indian common philosophy of which astrology is one. There was another section of people who were professionals in the truest sense of the term and earned their livelihood through this profession ; their methods of prediction were kept as trade secrets and common people who were interested in studying this subject obtained little help from these professionals whom people ot rural areas called acharyaj and held in high esteem, Due to their conservative habit many branches of astrology and palmistry have been dying. Of these branches we may mention a few, such as horary astrology and the method of finding out birth particulara from the palm.    Apart from the aforementioned scholars and professionals in thoae d,ys others showed little interest in the study of this subject. But this attitude is now completely changed, Young men and women of the present generation are taking great interest in studying and understanding the basic concepts of astrology and their application in making astrological forecasts. This is evident from the very large number of astrological books and periodicals in different Indian and Western lan1uages which are available in the market. To a beginner as well as to an advanced student of astrology the most difficult problem is to assimilate the basic concepts, because in doing so, they find that some sutras appear to be contradicted by others and students are puzzled and fail to take logical approach to the understanding of the subject. In fact the difficulty can only be avoided by adopting the correct methodology in the study of  the subject. It must be admitted that astrology is a science and like the study of other sciences it must be based on systematisation. Mere compilation of the contents from classical texts provides little a11i1tance to an astrologer or to a researcher in astrology. I have been a sincere student of astrology for the last fifty years and l have always felt the need for a book which can help an earnest student of astrology in following a systematic approach to the understanding of this subject. Attempts have been made to make this volume a comprehensive and systematic compilation that both a beginner and an advanced student may not be bewildered by the apparent contradictions	between	certain sutras.   In compiling this volume, I nave received immense help from my distinguished friends Shri Nirmal Chandra Moitra and Prof. Bimala Prasad Mukhopadhyaya and I would like to record here that I shall ever remain indebted to them. Lastly it would be a great fault on my part if I do not offer an apology to my learned readers for the undernoted lapses.  Certain Sanskrit terms and names are spelled differently In different places, such as :-vrhaspati is spelled somewhere as Vrhaspati, makara as also Makara etc.

CHAPTER-I
SOLAR SYSTEM

Hindu Astronomy considers Solar System in reference to its constituents, the 9 planets and the stars (Nakshatras or Constellations). This is only a fragment of the solar system we know and there are other solar systems beyond it. It is given to man, it is not possible for him to know of the vast firmament as a whole. He has to be content with only a very tiny fragment. The 9 planets are - Ravi (Sun), Chandra (Moon), Mangal (Mars), Budha (Mercury), Vrhaspati (Jupiter), Sukra (Venus), Sani (Saturn), Rahu (Dragon's head) and Ketu (Dragon's tail). Yet it must be noted that the planet does not have the same meaning in Astronomy and Astrology. The Moon in Astronomy reflects light from the Sun; but in Astrology they rank the same. The Dragon's head and Dragon's tail are just the nodal points beyond which they have no other form of existence. Yet Astrology ranks them as full-scale planets, on parity with the rest. The Sun is at the centre of his system which is called his?. The other planets are revolving round. the Sun but the Sun also is in a state of constant motion on his axis. And the whole cavalcade or procession is also in a state of incessant motion. The Earth, we live in is also a planet, and in addition to the nine said already. Western astrologers name 3 other planets Herschel or Uranus, Neptune and Pluto so that the total works out as 12. Hindu Astrologers do not know much of Herschel, Neptune and Pluto.  The Earth has one Moon against 4 for Jupiter.

Earth, the Planets and the Stars
Prithivee, Graha and Nakshatras
As is well-known, the earth takes 24 hrs. to turn on its axis and 365 days and 6 hrs. to circumambulate the Sun once.  As a result of these motions the phenomena which we call sunrise
and sunset takes place. In reality there is neither, but for all practical purposes, including astrological, they are very much a part of reckoning. The Zodiac has no beginning or end, it is just a circle of light. In order to measure the distancee an arbitrary is considered and taken into accounct, which is the first point of Aries (Mesa Rasi). The Zodiac is marked by 27 constellations or Nakshatras. The first point of Aswini, the first Nakshatra coincides with the first point of Mesa which is starting point of Zodiac.
  
Nakshatras: The mathematical system which is the foundation of Hindu Astrology in fact all subsequent Astrology, considers 27 Nakshatras and 12 Rasis (signs). Like the invention of Zero, this is another marvellous product of Hindu Astronomy and Astrology, that is to say, of Hindu Mathematics, a major achievement in the exact sciences. Another fundamental basis of Hindu calculations is the ecliptic, that is, the path of the Sun. It has been seen from numerous observations and deduced that within 8 degrees on either side of the ecliptic the presence of Nakshatras and planets effects and intfluences results.  The influence of the Sun as it passes along the ecliptic tincture with the results of other planets and Nakshatras near enough to influence and determine the career or destiny of creatures on earth. It is the job of Astrology to assess the nature and extent of these influences, as far as possible precisely. Each Rasi is 30 degrees and the total ecliptic 360 degrees. 8 degrees to the North of the ecliptic and 8 degrees to the South are taken along with the ecliptic itself and all the Nakshatras that fall within this rnnge are also considered simultaneously. The Nakshatras divided into 12 Houses work out at 2-1/4 Nakshatras for each house. And each Nakshatra has 13 degrees and 20 minutes (Kalas). The Sun travels roughly 1 degree in each day and 12 houses that is 360 degrees in 360 days.



Names of Bhavas :
There are twelve Bhavas which constitute a Rasi-Chakra or Birth Chart. The bhavas are to be counted from lagna in anti-clockwise way.
The names of the twelve bhavas are stated here below 
Tanu or Lagna (1st bhava), Dhana (2nd bhava), Sahaja (3rd bhava), Sukha (4th bhava), Putra (5th bhava), Satru (6th bhava), Jaya (7th bhava), Mrityu or Nidhan (8th bhava), Bhagya (9th bhava), Karma (10th bhava), Ayaya (11th bhava), Vyaya (12th bhava), Significance of these twelve bhavas will be dealt with elaborately at the time of delineation of twelve bhavas in Chapter IV and V, At present we are giving in short the significance of twelve bhavas.
   
(1) Tanu - Physical body. head, health, complexion, character and conduct etc.
(2) Dhana - Wealth and accumulated  wealth, speech, eye, face, teeth, relatives, food etc.
(3) Sahaja - Brother and Sister, effort, courage, servants, tenacity etc.
(4) Sukha - Education, happiness, mother, heart prosperity, friend, mind, qualities, house, vehicles, conveyance etc.
(5) Putra - Children, intellect, merit, talent, virtue, belly and intestine etc.
(6) Satru - Enemy, hostility, obstacle, litigation, maternal uncle, disease etc,
(7) Jaya - Marriage, wife or husband, married life, Sex andand Sexual act,trade,	business-partner, business journey etc.
(8) Mrityu or Nidhana - Death, longivity, litigation, speculative act, imprisonment, misery, family troubles, Genital organ, abdomen, rectum, palatial building, ancestral property, wealth acquired through lottery etc.
(9) Bhagya - Fortune, religion, religious acts, ascetism, journey to holy shrine, grace of spiritual guide, father, previous birth, long journey etc.
(10) Karma - Profession, vocation, dignity, reputation, positional influence, fame acquired through brilliant academic career, wealth of father, environment etc.
(11) Ayaya - Earning, income, profiteering, friend and relatives, elder brother and sister, peaceful condition etc.
(12) Vyaya -- Expenditure, left foot and eye, material enjoyment, sacrificial act, bed-room comfort, punishment inflicted by government, downfall etc.


Nakshatra (Constellations)   
1. Aswini - Arietus	
2. Bharani - Arietisa Mus	
3. krittika - Tauri Alcyoni	
4. Rohini - Tauri  Aldebaran	
5. Mrigasira - Orionis	
6. Aridra (ardra)- Orionis	
7. Punarvasu - Gemini Pollux	
8. Pushyami or Pushya - Cancri	
9   Aslesha - Hydrae	
10. magha (Magha)-Leonis Regulas  
11. Purba Falguni-Leonis	
12. Uttar Falguni- Leonis
13. Hasta - Corvi	
14. Chitra - Virginis Spica
15. Swati - Bootis Arcturus
16.  visaka - Librae
17. Anuradha - Scorpionis
18.  Jyesta - Aritares
19.  mula - Scorpionis
20. Purvashadha - Sagittarii
21.  Uttarashadha- Sagittarii
22. shravana - Aquilae
23.  dhanistha - Delphini
24.  shatabhisha - Aquarii
25.  Purvabhadra - Pegasi
26. uttarbhadrapada - Pegasi
27. revati - Piscium.



(3) Symhols of Planets
1.	Ravi, Surya(Sun)
2. Chandra (Moon)
3. Mangal (Mars)
4. Budha (Mercury)
5. Vrhaspati (Jupiter)
6. Sukra (Venus) 
7. Sani (Saturn)
8. Rahu (Dragon's head or ascending1 Node)
9. Ketu (Dragon's tail or descending Node)
10. Indra or Prajapati (Herschel or Uranus)
11. Varuna (Neptune)
12. Rudra, Yama (Puto)
13. Prithivi (Earth)


The learner of predictive Astrology has to master, at the outset, the nature of 12 Houses and 27 Nakshatras and 9 Planets and is also of the Lagna which is the position of the earth in the east at the time of birth of a child. The various and subtle conduct of each of the planets bas also to be learnt. It cannot be too strongly emphasised that this is based on very minute observations in a vast number of cases with encyclopedic knowledge as the subjacent instrument of research. How the planets behave is called 'Karakata'.

The 'Pecking order among the Rasis' All four-footed Rasis except the Simha are subordinate to the two-footed Rasis. The aquatic Rasis are edibles for two-footed Rasis and creeping Rasis as well as the aquatic ones subject to the domination of the two-footed. Simha Rasi claims supremacy over all except the creeping Rasis like Vrscika (Scorpio), Karkata (Cancer) etc.


The physical parts of kalapurush (Zodical Signs) 
Mesa - Head	
Vrsa - Face	
mithuna - Arms	
Karkata - Heart	
Simha - belly	
Kanya - Loin, Waist.	
Tula - The lower part of Naval.
Vrscika - Rectum.
Dhanu - Thigh
Makara - Knee
Kumbha - Shinbone, from region below Knee and within feet where there are tebia bones.
Mina - Feet

(If benefic planets have favourable influences on these parts of the Kalpurus the native derives beneficial results and if otherwise the result so far these parts are concerned is not to be favourable).



CHAPTER- II

PECULIARITIES OF RASIS EXPLAINED

Mesa Rasi :   { Head of Kalapurusb, very noisy, harsh voice, rough appearance, strong determination, diligent, arrogant, lascivious, likes pomp and grandeur, moves hither and thither, sensitive, brave. It has a challenging attitude, likes to involve itself in betting,dashing, clashes with opponents, its protest is not merely vocal, it does not feel shy to protest with physical force. It tends to stop the opponent with head or  chest, it  is arrogance personified, it exerts itself completely to attain the thing desired and to get that thing it may fight unto its last breath, fiery warfare, ball of fire, fiery arms and armaments, wealth plundered during war, fertile land where grains are grown in abundance, deaf and stammerer, constipation, diseases relating	biles, Venereal	disease, stricture, fire that helps digestion of food, top of mountain.	It is a store house of kinetic energy.    This is the first sign or rasi of the Zodiac, consists of Aswini, Varani and t part of Krittika nakshatras. Lord is Mangal, Symbol is a Ram. }
   
Vrsa Rasi: { Lord is Sukra, Symbol is a bull. It is sober and obstinate, it is as if immovable or can not be moved easily. In mythology the God Siva is considered to be sober but obstinate. He can not be activised easily. So, bull is his conveyance. The rasi is conservative, it does not care any body else, it is full of ego, its gait and movement speak of its nature and temperament. Attributes are : pouring, effervescent, discharge, emit, impregnate, making fertile, grow, beget or to be begotten, to be vexed, to chastise, to give profusely, manhood and manliness, productive power, leadership, moral qualities, egoist, sobriety, sanctimonious hypocrite, childless woman or a woman having manly nature, encouragement, impetuousness, beauty, sweet odour (fragrance) patience. This rasi comprises of 3/4 part of Krittika, Rohini and 1/2 of Mrigasira Nakshatras. It partakes of the qualities of Rohini Nakshatra that represents good dressing, and using extra quality toilet-products to look beautiful. Mrigasira Nakshatra represents sexual acts, calm and cool temper, and also cruelty, The rasi speaks of personality of a native, it is sober, has immense strength to forbear the onslaught of attack from the opponent. The rasi is full of self-conceit.   If it is influenced  by malefic  planet result  referred to above is reversed. It represents Tamo guna, indicates throat, ears, thumb and scrotum of kalapurush. }


Mithuna Rasi: { Joyful, normally a pleasant talker. Its Lord is Budha, symbol the twin figure of a man and a woman. The rasi consists of 1/2 mrigasira, ardra and 3/4 punarvasu Nakshatras. From the symbol it can be imagined easily that there is a dual personality in it. It represents the middle stage of frivolity and sobriety.  There is a dualism in it.  The store-house of creation in a woman and creative power of a man are mixed up in it. So, conservatism of a woman and frivolous nature and power of renovation of a man are found in it. Attributes:  Mixture, conjoining of things, twin, a man and a woman, dualism, indecisive mind, oscillation, working together in a friendly atmosphere. In the reverse way to quarrel with colleagues, or dual fight. In another way it may mean sexual intercourse, companionship between a man and woman, mysteriously going to a secret place. Wisdom, intelligence of Budha and his calmness are found in this rasi, softness, lively beauty of Mrigasira Nakshatra, wisdom of "ardra" and creative source of punarvasu are found in abundance in this rasi. This  rasi represents  the  middle stage of  happiness and miseries. This peculiar feeling in a man cannnot be described easily. It indicates two shoulders, arms and hands of kalapurush. }


Karkata Rasi: { Cool, good talker, large flabby body, intelligent, temperate, barren. Lcrd is Chandra, symbol crab. Consists of 1/4 of punarvasu, pushya and Aslesha Nakshatras. It is a watery rasi and is a reservoir of energy.  Therefore it is a complete manifestation of kinetic force. As it is a watery sign, it partakes the character of sentimentalism and at times effervesce exuberantly, or overflow and flows so fiercely that it breaks through all the obstacles that befall on its way. When obstructed it is filled up with sentimental feelings and carries away everything with it and destroys all obstructions. It is then impossible to check its current. If it does not face any obstruction even then it becomes full with sentimental feelings but it dies down silently within it. The sign is introspective. Its lord Chandra also is a sentimental planet. The sign represents idealism. It is fanciful, affectionate,  sympathetic and cool in nature. It is versatile, artistic, joyous, lively, highly intellectual, lightly influenced by ideas, gives pleasure to others, joking, flowing with murmuring sound, spreading, boiling, blooming, invigorating, a cocoanut fruit - a thing the exterior of which is hard and strong but the inner contents are watery and fluid, sticking to a thing, to be very much friendly to one who is in its own liking, to take the shape of something, to sacrifice for other's cause, philosophising, to scan others' qualities and frailties, phlegmatic constitution, to fall ill due to slight cold, sceptic habit, unworldly, always looking everything from ideal istic point of view, truthfulness, noble-mindedness, cleanliness, beauty, fame, independence, freedom and liberty, endlessness, to invigorate, fertilisation, flabbiness. If malefically influenced - to surround secretly, to render unholy or unclean, worried mind due to cliquish temperament, to poison. Chest and Lungs of kalapurush.}


Simha Rasi : { Hot (Not so hot as Mesa Rasi), determination, diligent, greedy, angry, addiction to sensual pleasure, brave, moving, likes a few companions, high sounding, harsh but grave voice, appearance full of gravity, tall figure, not fertile. Its Lord is Ravi (Sun), symbol is a lion. It consists of Magha, purvaphalguni and 1/4 of uttaraphalguni. The sign is full of glamour and light. Its shining glamour as if lights up everything around it. It is a fixed sign. So, it is not frivolous but full of life. It is a creative sign. This is the only sign that has the gravity of a tall banian tree. It is a fiery sign but has no burning quality of Mesa rasi. It has the character of a Lord, a king, and it is majestic in style and gait. Though full of ego its personality attracts others. Woman of Sim ha rasi (if Chandra is  situated in this sign) is not liked by astrologers as she is full of pride and likes to lord over others. To win over everything, always strives hard to win over all kinds of obstacles, to want supremacy, patience, powerful, to show respect, dignity, bravery, kind, prosperous, it is accorded highest honour, to establish its own reputation, patronage, to give shelter to others, to protect those whom it gives shelter. Heart and stomach of kalapurush. }


Kanya Rasi : { Calm, pleasant talker, tall figure, intelligent, barren (unfertile), cold, green colour.  Lord is Budha (Mercury), symbol - a virgin girl standing on a floating boat with a bunch of ears of corn in one hand. Nakshatra-uttaraphalguni, Hasta  and 1/2 Chitra.  The rasi is a mixture of 'Satwa' and 'tamo' gunas.  It is sometimes joyous and at other times grave.  A virgin, chaste girl, fully grown up ,young just a blooming youth, a woman of bright complexion, innocent girl. Beauty, decent, soft, to grow joyful and obedient, to be pleased, to hanker after, to be admired by any other person, benevolence, beamining with knowledge, to give vent to one's feeling decently, to be enlivened by learning, to dispel darkness, painting, artist, skilful,  imagination, to accomplish any work properly, doubt, want of faith, want of deep thinking, uncertainty, to float like a floating boat, to analyse and judge a thing accurately, advise, culture of knowledge. any pleasurable sensation, amorous. Intestine and waist region of Kalapurush. }

Tula Rasi:  { Warm, full of sound, even but pleasant talker, calm, tall figure.  Lord is Sukra (Venus), symbol is a man with a scale in his band weighing something. Nakshatra - 1/2 Chitra, Swati and 3/4 visaka.  It has the speed of wind (vayu), many-sided, characteristic of spreading hither and. thither, to compare, to examine or scrutinise, to counter balance, to possess in the same degree, tribunal, assessment of real worth, business, buying and selling, store house, scale, al ways restless, unsteady in a place, to roam, to establish a self-idealism, 6ocial, an active worker, to like to lord over others, tools or impleme•its to analyse a thing, to accomplish a work, to remain engaged in various types of work, changing, assortment. systematise. Kidney and buttock of Kalapurush. }

vrscika Rasi : { White colour, phlegmatism, fertile, stammerer or dumb, inaudible tongue, tall figure,  Tamo guna. Lord is Mangal (Mars), symbol is Scorpion-like creature. Nakshatra is 1/4 visaka, Anuradha and jyesta. Conservatism, Inertia. It is a watery sign, therefore, there is some sort of restlessness in it. If met with any obstruction from outside agent it reacts sharply. It is an introspect sign. Its ugly appearance is not manifested if its feeling is not wounded. It gets angry and restless like a scorpion. It has the acute tendency to hurt the opponent. It is full of ego, and crookedness. Under an adverse condition it becomes cruel and hurts its opponent fiercely. When it becomes very enraged and annoyed with its opponent but is unable to take vengeance it gets very much agitated and the vehemence is consumed within itself and the sentiment dies down. It is the negative sign of Mangal. Hence malefic character of this planet is very much evident in this sign. The autocratic temperament, oversensitiveness and arrogance of Mangal is manifested in the vrscika Rasi. To pierce, to cut into pieces, to sting, to poison, to spoil, to destroy, to wipe out, to smitten with bitter words, to bring disaster to somebody, loss due to some inimical work of others. The Rasi is prominently unpopular for its cruel characteristic, but it does not care other's criticism and faces everything stubbornly and challenges its critics. Anything that causes obstruction, to fight. An extremist and critic, an upsetter of existing ideas and ways of living, and where it cannot do this, a sarcastic and cynical critic. Its beneficial characteristics are to love or be affectionate, to arrange th;ngs, to adorn, to be alert, to guard, to act as a police. Generative and excretory organs of Kalapurush. }


Dhanu Rasi: { Determined, diligent, restless, pompous, want of foresight, greedy, noisy, harsh talker, calm, composed, pleasant talker, medium height, imprudent, lack of foresight. Lord is Vrhaspati (Jupiter). Symbol is horse (front portion of the body) with a rider on its back and armed with bow and arrow (Its front part is quadruped). Nakshatra - mula, purvashadha, and 3/4 uttarashadha. The negative sign of Vrhaspati. It is more materialistic than spiritualistic. It indicates energy and represents kinetic force. From the symbol the character is evident, Universality, invincible spirit, "The archer points out his shaft at higher and better things. The sign of a seer and prophet, idealist, aspirant to a life of devotion. The appearance of the sign is warlike which it really is. Persons born under its influence are fiery and warlike in nature. Endowed with great strength, the Sagittarious are highly intelligent, respected for their good qualities." Vide Astri-Magazine, Feb, '51. It is not lover of imagination, because it has to proceed through many obstacles, mountainous  regions and defeat its enemies. So it is a practical idealist sign. It is a sign of animal and man. So, the animal is controlled by highest knowledge and wisdom of a man. It is a searcher of knowledge and truth. Nakshatra mula speaks of animal power, and Poorba and uttarashadha represent energy, calmness, perseverance and truth, speed, to proceed with highest speed, to shoot arrows, bow and arrow, to pierce through the mark, to shatter all sorts of obstructions, to search for light, to be armed with weapons, endowed with merits. Encouragement, bravery that gives impetus to others, to know the source of all Sciences, arts and truth or to practise devotional austerities to know all. Hips, buttock, thigh of Kalapurush. }


makara Rasi: { Perseverent, diligent, industrious, restless, foppish, lover of a few companions, addicted to sensual pleasures, brave, very noisy, high sound, harsh voice, medium figure. Lord is Sani (Saturn).  Symbol-the front portion is a goat, and the hinder part is that of a crocodile. Nakshatra - 1/4 uttarashadha, shravana and 1/2 Dhanistha.  It is a cardinal sign no doubt but it is not a high-speed sign. This can be easily imagined from the appearance of its symbol. It can hardly move on a plain. The movement is slow but sure. It has earnestness to reach its goal in spite of obstacles that may befall on its way. It represents matter and material thing but it is industrious and a sure climber. It proceeds breaking through obstructions or move in a zig-zag way to avoid them.  The structure of the body shows that it cannot be indisciplined. Materialistic,  disciplinarian, and  an  expert  industrialist, universality, a social figure, to settle into definite form of mind, to create, letting loose, builder of a career, the sign of a businessman who is sometimes exacting to the point of dishonesty, a politician. Knees of Kalapurush. }


Kumbha Rasi: { Warm, rheumatic and bilious constitution, calm and gentlo, noisy, normal talker, short figure. Lord is Sani ( Saturn ),  Symbol is a man with a waterful pitcher on his shoulder. Nakshatra 1/2 Dhanistha, shatabhisha and 3/4 purvabhadra. Symbol indicates that it is sobre, has an end in view and always alert and careful.  It has confidence in itself, and is earnest in its undertakings. The pitcher is a significant sign no doubt. Because if it looses its confidence in itself, be a bit careless or be less earnest it is not possible to move with a pot full of water. For if his attention is in any way diverted the water of the pitcher will fall down. Moreover, its path and goal is fixed. It has a great attraction for them. The discipline, fixity of purpose and slow but sure progress of Sani is found in the nature of this Rasi. Earnestness, carefulness, to fill up, to cover, two different kinds, to fill up with water or air, to move on a fixed goal, conservation, selfishness, prominence in the upper part of the, forehead, self-indulgence, heart trouble, abundance. Shanks of legs of Kalapurush. }


Mina Rasi:  { Day and night, calm, soft, silent, dumb or stammerer, restless mind, intelligent, faithful, impatient, slow and steady, short figure.	It represents Satva guna.  Nakshatra - 1/4 purvabhadra, uttarbhadrapada and revati. It is the last rasi of the Zodiac. Lord is Vrhaspati. Symbol is two fishes in the deep sea, kissing each other's tail. A sea has two appearances.	Externally it is violent and restless, but its bottom is calm and cool. Its external appearancc speaks of restlessness, sentimentalism, roaring sound etc., but the bottom is calm but dangerous. There lies all kinds of Jewels. The two fishes, as if bathe deep in water and are influenced by each other's sentiment. So, this rasi is manifested within itself, the exuberance in the outer region is not its own real feeling. To be joyful, to be actuated by sentiments, to be happy, to be comfortable, to be agitated, to be haughty, to prosper step by step or by hopping, to flow intermittently, to sink deep into water, to think of one's emancipation, to be influenced, itching, eczema, bunches of curling hair. The wife of the person having this Rasi dies an early death or becomes paralysed, and the native gets married again, "a restless and creative mind with romantic and imaginative outlook necessary for successful writer of fiction, liable to be obsessed with curious fancies. Pisces ( Mina Rasi ) is the sign of artist and author." Diseases relating to urine, diseases of the intestine or stomach. Two feet, ankles of Kalapurush. }


PECULIARITIES OF NAKSHATRAS
( Nakshatras' Karakata)

 
   It has been said already that each Rasi extends over 2-1/4 stars (Nakshatras) in the zodiacal space ; which is the same as saying that 2-1/4 Stars make up each Rasi. It would foliow from this that the influence of the stars should help us to determine the nature and the influence of Rasi itself. It is necessary however to enter upon 'Caveat'. The sidereal effect is by no means the whole of the Rasi effect, though is certainly a large ingredient of it. The Stars certainly influence the Rasi.
   
   The Mesa Rasi consists of Aswini, Bharavi and krittika. The first two is 13°-20' each and the third one is 3°-20', the remaining 10° degree is in Vrsa Rasi.
   
   Aswini Nakshatra: 'Devata' for Aswini Nakshatra is Aswi or the Duality known as Aswini Kumar Twins, the physician of the Gods. Symbol - the head of a horse. So, by the influence of this star the native is expected to be equestrian (horse-ride) or a soldier, also a physician with marvellous power to heal. The after-speak of physician's excellence or process. It is possible, in the horoscopes of these physicians it will be seen that the planet for successful medical practice is positioned in Aswini Nakshatra.	From Aswi is supposed to be derived carraiges for animals for transport, everything related to transport and transport department.	The Puranas relate that the two Aswini Kumaras were born of mother Sanga and father Ravi. The mother held the solar semen in her nostrils, for otherwise she could not hold it, it is so strong. They are the twins of Sanga and therefore this Nakshatra is supposed to produce twins. Mangal in this Nakshatra - specially if the Lagna is in Kumbha and Mangal in bhratristhan indicates twin brother and sister for the native. Or if Ravi, Vrhaspati or Pitri Karaka or lord of the bhava signifying father or son in a similar way is in this Nakshatra then the father or any of the uncles or any of the children may be one of the twin.
   
   Bharani Nakshatra :  Devata Yama; birth star of  Rahu. lt extends from 13'-20' to 26'-40' Symbol :  Orifice of the womb (oss-mouth), lord Mangal.  It is possible to have an idea of the nature of Bharavi Nakshatra from the nature of Rahu, Mangal and Yama. 1. Rahu  gives extravagant  enjoyment  of material pleasure and is hter on the cause of sorrow. 2. Mangal gives courage, strength, exaltation and hope.    3. Yama purity, cleanliness, justice and integrity. The sense of restraint is also Yama's gift ; he is the lord of Dharma, a stern disciplinarian, a ruthless expositor of truth, and a refuge for kings and law-abiding subjects.	We should not always confine his interpretation to his being only the lord of death; he is the great 'judicature', the ultimate dispenser of reward and punis:iment.	The story of 'Yama-Nachiketa' is a particularly exposition of the hospitality of Yama, his sense of dharma and knowledge of it, his superb honesty and great integrity and other divine virtues. The Nakshatra of which he is the devata (God) is also in consequence the giver of enjoyment and pleasures, courage and upward thrust of the spirit and on the other hand the giver of whatever is good, pure, truthful and honest.    The etymological meaning of Bharani is "what deserves to be cultivated and preserved" that is dependence, servitors, retainers or anything by which living is earned, for example salary.


   Krittika Nakshatra :	This is the birth star or Chandra. Many constellations gather at the tail end of Krittika group.  It extends from Mesa 26°-40'. The residuary 10" degree fall in Vrsa. The devata is Agni, Lord (Adhipati) is Mangal and Sukra. Agni is the great purifier, the great consumer and the giver of light, heat and brightness.	Agni causes the fire of life and the drive.	It is also the spark of life. Without fire creation would not exist. Agni is at the base of creation and of the continmtion of existence.	It consumes everything.	The fire of digestion in the human system and the external fire for cooking are only different manifestation of the same principle which is Agni. Agni is the symbol of brightness and brilliance, all weapons with fire-power,	And other things of the same category come within the range of Krittika group.  The fire is considered as purifier; for it burns away all that is sordid, dark and dull, also all that is low and sinful and inauspicious in the world,	The dross thus blazed away, only effulgence and light remain. Fire gives the earth its activity and dynamic and revives it after the spells of cold that periodically inflict comatose condition of the earth.  It is easy enough to deduce from fire the causal effect of the Krittika group.  Mangal is the lord of that part of Krittika which is in Mesa Rasi and Mangal is like a mass of lightning in shining splendour.  So, the Krittika in Mesa is devastatingly brilliant, the effulgence being closely associated with also an incendiary character.
   
   The krittika of Vrsa Rasi is brilliant but unlike the krittika of Mesa, not incendiary. The lord of Vrsa Rasi is Sukra and Sukra stands for worship of beauty and for poetry and imagination.  He is radiantly white like snow, the 'Kunda' flower and the 'Utpal'. He is also the encyclopedic expounder of all branches of learning.  It follows that the Krittika of Vrsa Rasi is brilliant hut the brilliance does not burn, it is soft and sweet, and benign.  The krittika of Mesa Rasi is doubtless brilliant, it has plenty of heat which burns. The krittika of Vrsa has on the contrary a softenod radiance, a wave of brightness that d,es nothurt. In Western Astrology krittika has been described as an incendiary star.
   
   Rohini nakshatra:  The word is derived from "Rohan" which means 'to rise' or 'to bring into existence'. It extends in the Vrsa Rasi from 10° degree to 23°-20', The lord of it is Sukra. the symbol a Cart drawn by Cows. The 'Devata' is Brahma, the prime creator of all things living, from the meanest insect to Man, the beauty of the weird, the paragon of animals. Rohini  group therefore encompasses everything that comes within the range of creation -- beasts, birds, animals etc.  It would also connote the process of growing, begetting, birth, production etc, in brief production, birth and creation. Rising means process of ascending, that is to say the creative evolution, the cultivation and the improvement.	Mythology describes 'Rohini' the wife of Chandra.  Of all the 27 Stars - all wives of Chandra - Rohini is said to have been fond of fine dress, cosmetics and decore and was the most beloved of Chandra. The Rohini (group) is, in the line with this, considered to be the cause of a taste for fine dress, perfume, and other articles of toilet.  Creation continues to exist mainly on the basis of food ; and Rohini is supposed to be the cause of food.  The direct and immediate cause of food is Agni and Brahma the remote cause. From this point of view the God who gives food, that is Agni, is the spiritual principle of Rohini (group) Nakshatra and because, Brahma the remote cause of food is also the devata of Rohini; the range of influences of this group runs over the whole gamut of the visible and invisible animal world.
   
   Mrigasira nakshatra : Mrigasira Nakshatra extends from after 23°-20' in Vrsa Rasi upto 6°-40' in mithuna. Presiding deity Chandra. Symbol - Antelope or Deer. The word 'Mriga' represents forests, gardens, a search, a seeking to find, to roam about in the forests and a hunter, to seek, to blaze the trail, a guide and preceptor. An erotic affair, beauty of the countenance with particular emphasis on the radiant lustre of the face, because of the Moon. To seek as the primary characteristic of the star, to discover hidden treasures after the churning of the Sea, the 'Samudra Manthan' of the Hindu Mythology, the mother, motherly conduct that is to say maternal instincts, self-sacrifice without hope of requital etc.  Chandra is the lord of the mind, so all mental attitude, good or bad, sympathies and antipathies, patience and impatience, the fidgetiness and placidity, imagination, the gift of poetry, purity, sweetness and light, physical and mental aspects, all these come within this star and when things of sweetness and light of physique as also of the mind, both derivatives from the moon, the horoscope of Rabindra Nath comes to mind. His Janma lagna was Mina with Chandra there and Vrhaspati was in Karkata Rasi. Because of this yoga Rabindra Nath had something like physical translucence which was object of admiration all the world over, wherever people met. Also, at the same time his poetry enthralled the whole world. The Moon is a sub-planet round the earth and that is why the influence of the Moon on all that happens in the earth is so paramount. And again that is why the influence of the Moon on both the body and mind is simultaneously so very great. Sukra and Chandra both are female grahas ( Planets ) with difference that while tile Moon is the Lord of motherhood, maternal instincts and all that, Sukra is the lord of feminine beauty, the structure of feminine form, the physical excellence of women and all that. In the former there is elegance and dignity of the feminine while in the latter, the physical beauty and the lure of feminine form which leads a male captive dominates. The moon is the lord of marine products and of medicines ; that it was from the sea that the moon rose. And it is to the moon that the influences and causalities have to be traced.
   
ardra Nakshatra: In mithuna from after 6°40' to 20°. The presiding deity the Rudra, the wielder of the trident. Symbol - a tear-drop. The lord of ardra is Budha, when the Sun enters ardra the earth is said to be starting its menstrual course, that is "Ambobachi".  ardra means wet or surcharged with water, that is fat. Because the earth is running her menstrual course there are tear drops falling one after another. From Rudra comes all suffering, persecutions and oppressions, anger, ferocity of countenance or hideousness of noise.  Rudra is another name of Siva, the 'Five Faced' {Panchanana). In knowledge, asceticism, renunciation, as also in enjoyment, he is the supreme consummation of all desires. He is a blue-throated one, the wielder of the most tremendous powers, what could not be attempted far less achieved by other Gods, when the churned Ocean at the time of 'Samudra Manthan' exhaled poison Siva achieved quite simply by holding the exhalation in his throat.  On one side he is the symbol of the most perfect placidity and serenity, on the other hand he is the symbol of all that is terrible.  He holds the great serpent on his bead and on bis forehead crescent Moon with his sweet-soft light. He is at the same time the most peaceful and also the most terrible. And in all these are to be traced the intrinsic characteristics of ardra. Superficially, on the surface of it, ardra stands for suffering, hardness, cruelty, murder, prison, theft, adultery etc. The root characteristic is oppression-in order to purify. All male kidney trouble and connected urethral disease comes within the jurisdiction of ardra ; so also uterine diseaes of the female. The skull of Kalapurush and hair on it.
   
   Punarvasu Nakshatra: Spread from 20° degree mithuna upto 3°-20' Karkata. Presiding deity 'Aditi', the Lord is Budha and Chandra. Symbol - Quiver ( receptacle for arrows). The word Punarvasu is derived from Puna + Vasu, which means return, renewal, restoration or repetition. The 12 Adityas were born of Kasyapa in the womb of Aditi. The 12 are Indra, Vishnu, Vaga, Twasta, Barun, Aryama, Pusa., Mitra, Agni, Parjyanya, Vivaswan and Dinakar. The mother Aditi of whom the Gods are born is the repository of everything good - truth, generosity, magnanimity, purity, aristocracy, beauty and renown. It follows that this start is the cause for these virtues. To start afresh after having once broken off, to start a new life, to come back from a distant land - all these are signified by Punarvasu. It stands for freedom from restriction and limitation, and boundless space. The Gods. the children of Aditi, are basically and essentially are different from children of Diti, who are demons. The demons never had a taste of divine nectar and therefore miss the knowledge of fundamentals, fundamentals of creation and mystery. They were engrossed with or deeply emerged in enjoyment of the externals, the materialistic aspect of the universe. Gold and sex were the two immediate pursuits, which made them extroverts. The Gods however, could rip into the deeper texture of things, they had tasted the divine nectar and become partners in supreme divine bliss and Punarvasu represents all these.
   
   pushya Nakshatra: Spread from 3°-20' to 16°-40' Karkata. Lord Chandra. Symbol - Teat of the Cow, the word etymologically means "to nourish" and that again means to preserve, to protect, replenish, multiply and strengthen.  Everything of the very best comes within the scope of this Star. Enjoyment of wealth and prosperity follows from it. Vrhaspati is described as the  great  teacher  of  all  creation from amoebae to the Gods and is the source of all knowledge and wisdom. The mystery of creation is no mystery to him. He is the eloquent preceptor, the wise minister, pontifex, head of all religious ceremonies. He takes pleasure in all worshipful ritual. And that is why the pushya is composed of these virtues. It bas been described as blossoming and flourishing. It is the mouth of Orion or kalapurush
   
Aslesha  Nakshatra:  Spread  from  16°-40'  to 30° degree. Karkata. Chandra is the lord. It is the	birth star of Ketu. Symbol - coiled up snake. It is the nature of a snake to hide himself, to encircle and entwine, to creep on the chest, to embrace, and to enjoy or unite surreptitiously. All this is an attribute of Aslesha also. The cunningness of the serpent, its devious nature. the burning sensation of poison and pain along with all consequences that poison connotes are to be read in the constitution of Aslesha. The virtues and vices of the serpent are all in it. The Moon in Aslesha sicklied over with various faults in great intensity.  Whoever would have his or her Karmapathi ( Lord of the 10th house ) or bhagyapathi [Lord of the 9tll house) in this star would run the risk of having all his or her principal acts in life handicapped, jeopardised or spoiled by many kinds of danger and obstruction. If the lagna is in this star, the native would possibly be of willy disposition.	Such people would like to work in secret and their words would carry the sting of poison. 

Magha Nakshatra: Spread from 0° degree to 13°-20' Simha. Ravi is the lord, the deity 'Pitrigan'. Symbol - The royal Court with a royal throne. Attributes - The virtues and vices of the father's family, wealth, glory, beauty, strength and prowess. lustre and effulgence, superior qualities, sharpness of intellect, nobility, prestige, replenishment, and increase, wisdom, brilliance, capacity and willingness to donate, ancestors on the paternal side - all these are effected by Magha. In no star the position of Ravi is so magniflceot and dignified. Ravi in "Aswini" is brilliant no doubt but the brilliance of incendiary character. It burns everything about it. The Sun is then a terrible ball of fire. But in Magha Ravi is like an emperor, confident and self-assured.  If happy and pleased he is in a mood to make any benediction or gift.   When Ravi is in Magha Sani gets alarmed and that is natural. For Sani is by character, of a mean disposition, the nature of a slave, no wonder that mean and lowly Sani cannot brook the beauty and the dignity of the position of Ravi in Magha, That is why Sani is 'Nicha' and anti-meridional in Aswini and meanness and willyness of Sani so much increases. If Sani is the lord of 9th & 10th houses and is placed in the 4th house and associated with Magha he acts adversely the effects of the 4th & 10th houses. Magha is the causes of brightness and light, Therefore old and gloomy planets cannot stand it. Magha stands for noble impulses and incentives, the gift of Magha must always be a noble one. Magha has been described as glorious one. Anthropomorphically it is the nose of kalapurush.

   Poorva Falguni Nakshatra:	Spread from 13°-20' to 26°-40' Simha,	Lord	Ravi, deity	"Shivalinga", Symbol - Swinging hammock. It is also called the Bhagadaivata Star. All the six majesties, pleasures and prosperities, love, enjoyment and sensual delights are caused by this Nakshatra.  The origin of creation is the "Shivalinga". It is the symbol of the call for creation. it announces creation and development. The closure of it means destruction. The individual who in personal life succeeds in mastering the six impulses, that is the impulse of creativity which masters also death. Therefore, on the one hand this star symbolises the joy of creation and enjoyment, and on the other hand signifies desirelessness and asceticism.	On the one hand it is the gateway to creation, basic seed of it, on the other hand it aims at renunciation, dissolution, and a merger in 'Brahma'.	Fame and renown are the special feature of this star. Poorva Falguni and Uttar Falguni are symbol of good fortune and luck. It is the birth star of Vrhaspati. Anthropomorphically it is the upper lip of Kalapurush.
   
    Uttar Falguni nakshatra : Spread from 26°-40' Simha to 10° degree Kanya. The lords are Ravi and Budha, symbol is a bed. Poorva Falguni and Uttar Falguni are pair together. Its attributes are much the same as those of Poorva Falguni. The only difference is that generosity, kindness, patronage and an eagerness to help and succour the distress, to help friends and intimates and those who seek help are more pronounced in this star.
	
   Hasta Nakshatra : Spread from 10° to 23°-20' Kanya. Deity Sun, Lord Budha, symbol - closed band. The 12 names of the Sun  are:  (1)  Arun,  (2)  Aditya,  (3)  Tapan,  (4)  Divakar, (5) Bhaskar, (6)  Bhanu, (7)  Martanda,  (8)  Mihir, (9)  Ravi, (10) Bivakar, (11)  Sahasramsu and (12) Sura.    All the attributes of these names etymologically connotes are caused by this star. From the Sun we derive creativity and creation, and from creation we derive light, lustre, and  strength. The Sun is the prime cause of dominion, kingship, power of immunity and the light that dispels darkness. Budha is the cause of knowledge. If placed in this Star he sheds light all around. Ravi with this Nakshatra enhances the instinct of dominion and the capacity to rule over others. It brushes up human intelligence, making it more luminous and makes a man vibrant with life and light. The symbol is a closed hand or fist. It would fJllow that it signifies determination and clenched resolution. To keep everybody within one's grip, the possessive instinct follows from the nature of this star. The magician and the pick-pocket are also born under this star-variation from nobler attributes. Anthropomorphically it is the hand of Kalapurush.
   
   Chitra Nakshatra: Spread from 23°-20' Kanya to 6°-40' Tula Rasi. The lords are Budha and Sukra, deity Viswakarma, the symbol is the gem on the serpent's crest. Chitra is very beautiful to look at. Viswakarma, the great artist and artificer to the Gods, the lord of practical arts and applied asthetics. The "knowledge an<i capacity to paint, the gift of narration and well-ordered conversation. From Chitra is derived the painter, specialist in paints, the artist, the musician, the skilful surgeon, the imaginative writer, the specialist in aromatic herbs and dreamer of intricate pa terns. The art of construction, the art of engraving, embroidery, frame-making and everything that constitutes an artistic complex from fine embroidery to the Tajmahal and on the other hand industrial engineering and skill and the organisation of machinery and plants -- everything is caused or influenced by Chitra. It is Anthropomorphically the forehead of Kalapurush.


   Swati Nakshatra : Spread from 6°-40' to 20° Tula. Lord is Sukra, the deity is the Wind and because of this latter factor this causes the attributes of the Wind. Restlessness of disposition or physical restlessness, inability to stay still at any place comes from it; also fidgetiness and noise. It is self-assured and asserting. The winds (Marut) are the Lords of North-West. The 49 of them under the 'Paban', of all Gods he is the strongest and most obstinate. From these are derived the knowledge, the physical internal adjustments of the 5 Winds -Pran, Apan. Vyan, Udan and Saman. Also from this comes the storms and the whirlwind, the concrete disturbance of the atmosphere. A person born under this star is good at buying and selling, his wealth and property come and go quite easily. He is an independent sort of man, always striving for more independence. Asceticism is yet another attribute of this star. Diseases of the wind are to be treated in reference to this. The Wind is the great scavenger, it sweats the dross and purifies. The winowing of rice bears comparison to this.
   
   visaka Nakshatra: Spread from 20° degree Tula upto 3°-20  Vrscika Rasi. The lords are Sukra and Mangal, Deity is Satragni. Symbol - a leaf-decked triumphal gate.  Another name of this Star is Radha, a compliment to Anuradha, the birth star of the Sun. From this is derived the fulfilment of action, variety of enterprise, achievement irrespective of the means employed and fearless and unscrupulous pursuit of self-interest. The only objective being to reach the end justifying it by any means fair or foul. Real friendship hardly happens.  A man born under this star works at various things but hardly concentrates on any one of them. To spread about and to dissipate is another attribute of this star.  The native of this star aims at success and is pleased with it when it happens, nothing else matters. Among other attributes may be mentioned obedience to religious. injunctions, quickness on the uptake, and also loss and disaster from enemies, sometimes even death or lunacy.
   
   Anuradha Nakshatra: Spread from 3°-20' to 16°-40' Vrscika Rasi. Lord is Mangal, Symbol - the same as that of visaka, visaka and Anuradha are complimentary to each other. From Anuradha is derived friendship, love, affection aad other tende, feature of a person's character.  From visaka is considered the ultimate objective while from Anuradha is indicated the 'action'. The difference between visaka and Anuradha is that while the visaka-native forgets after success about benefits derived as also the persons who helped, the Anuradha-native retains soft feeling about them, he keeps his friendship intact and does not  forget the benefits. The Anuradha-native's mind is al ways alive and receptive to all feelings and gestures of friendship and love.  He is like the sentinel always a mounting guard over emotions, but lacking the hardness or toughness of the official sentinel.
   
   jyesta Nakshatra: Spread from 16°-40' uplo 30° degree Vrscika Rasi, Lord is Mangal, the deity is Indra, equivalent to Ravi, the king of the firmament. Indra is the great lord, the mighty warrior and a hero among heroes by tradition and in the plenitude of power he reigns supreme. He is the first among courtesans. When this star is unfavourable it causes sorrow and poverty.   Anthropomorphically Middle Finger and Neck of Kalapurush. 
   
   mula Nakshatra :	Spread from O° degree to 13°-20' Dhanu Rasi, Lord is Jupiter (Vrhaspati). Symbol - a bunch of roots tied together, deity  'Nirithi' or 'Alakshmi',	It also means the 'opposite' or 'reverse'.	mula is not one of the good stars which is evident from this that the deity is Alakshmi i.e. God of ill luck. mula signifies roots, that is to say, everything of basic nature, its motion is finite and limited. It does not go beyond its narrow orbit. Old servant, pedlar of seeds, physician administering herbal seed remedies-every such thing is determined from this star. The mula native looks into scientific, literary, philosophic and other basic subjects.  Mortgage and Mortgaged property are governed by this star and its horizon is not rural but urban.
   
   purvashadha Nakshatra : Spread from 13°-20' upto 26°-40' Dhanu Rasi.  Lord is Vrhaspati, the deity is 'Barun' (Lord of the Waters), symbol a 'hand fan'. Its attributes are extensiveness like that of the waters. concealment, protection of the dependant, firmness in danger, kindness, forgiving nature, power of endurance, will to victory, biting time for opportunities for victory, declaration of war, the courage never to submit or yield, travel by water, cold things, marine life, fish or anything concerning fish trade, bridge-making, fisherman's occupation, the watery part of the  human system, the  watery  diseases like Brights disease, kidney trouble, things that float on waters like boats, ships, and other vessels, mists, barges, all these things come within the purview of tnis star. According to some, the deity of 'purvashadha' is 'Daksha' the son of Prajapati. He was the father of 'Sati', and was the most powerful among the Gods , but having incurred the displeasure of 'Shiva' he was beheaded and had a goat's instead of his own. From this it is possible to ascribe attributes like truth, desire and other qualities of Puru, Kuru, Puruuba and others to this star.
   
uttarashadha Nakshatra : Spread from 26°-40' Dhanu to 10° degr of Makara.  Lord 1s Vrhaspati and Sani. the derivatives from uttarashadha are closely allied to those of purvashadha. The points of difference are as follows. purvashadha spreads out, is concerned with extensivenesss	uttarashadha is introspective  and penetrative and is concerned with intensiveness, the results of the latter being more permanent than the former (purvashadha). The deity who preserves this world and makes for its welfare is called 'ganadevata', There are ten ganadevatas -- Basu,, Satya, Kratu, Daksha, Kala, Kama, Dhriti, Kuru, Pururaba, Madraba. All their attributes are in  this star.  The warrior, the wrestler, the painter, the artist, the magician, the well-dressed man, the happy and success men are influenced by this star. A special chancteristic of it is  that  it  causes  a person to be admired and socially applauded. Another characteristic of it that under the influence of this star the native falls in love with an unmarried girl. Vishma of the Mahabnarata was one of the 8 Basus so under this star one possesses self-control, restraint, endurance, and firm character. There are special rituals for the worship of ganadevatas, which are more or less of specialised nature. The juice of Soma plant plays a part in 'yagna' and worship.


shravana Nakshatra:  Spread after 10° degree upto 23°-20' in makara. Lord Sani, symbol 3 footprints, deity Hari who takes alt1 forms of Brahma, Visnnu, Siva, etc, It is the birth star of Saraswati.  From this is derived light-rays, lion, beasts, horse etc. "Hari" means "to take away".  From shravana is derived  the art of hearing and education and audile education. As the birth star of Saraswati, it signifies and bestows scholarship, educational proficency respect of the shastras, knowledge etc. The eminent men in the field of education and knowledge, the man who is listened to by others with respect is influenced by this star. It causes diseases of the urethral channel.


dhanistha Nakshatra : Spread from 23°-20' in makara upto 6°-40' in Kumbha. Lord Basudaivata. Symbol drum and tabla. Because Basudaivata is the deity of this star -- it is the giver of wealth, precious stone, valuable articles,, gold, opulence etc.  Asthavasu derives from Ganga.  The virtues of these gods are associated with this star.	Persons born under this star are
hostile to women. Because, they lack adequate sex power. If Saturn is the lord of 7th house and also in this star -- any planet in the 7th house and associated with this star will also do -- the native will be sexually weak.  It has to be noted that Saturn himself is eunuch,.  The native of the Star, seldom marries or marriagee is difficult for him, if married conjugal relation is seldom happy. Anthropomorphically it is the back of Kalapurush.


shatabhisha Nakshatra:	Spread  from  after  6°-40'  upto 20° in Kumbh.  Lord Sani. Symbol a circle. The Ocean, rivers, lakes etc. are derived from this star and it signifies aquatic marine life. It concerns boats, concealment, the veil, and to hide beneath the veil, covering, armour, places to hide things, failures, no-easy success, sorrow, death, restrain, idleness, peevishness, cynicism and a mania for excessive cleanliness. Diseases indicated by this star are dropsy, rheumatism and heart disease.


purvabhadra Nakshatra :  Spread  from after 20° in Kumbha upto 3° 20' in Mina. Lord Sani and Vrhaspati, deity Ajopada (Rudra}. Symbol double-faced man. It causes burns, punishes by fire, to cause pain, to burn things to ashes, to use words that burn, conduct that blisters, to use hiarsh words, evil disposition, cruelty, greediness, restlessness, feeling of despair and unsatisfied  ambition,  to burn by slow degrees, sudden excess of anger etc. Anthropomorphically the side of the body of Kalapurush.

   Uttarbhadrapada Nakshatra: Spread from after 3°-20' upto 16°-40' in Mina. Lord Vrhaspati, deity Ohibridna, symbol the last i.e. funeral bed. The Star is adorned with serpent-like symbol. It looks like rice , jts properties and attributes are like those of ardra, some attributes of purvabhadra also are found. purvabhadra shows signs of contrition and atonement while Uttarbhadrapada shows restrain. From this are to be calculated long distance journeys, renunciation of vordly possessions and mendicancy etc. On the other hand knowledge, learning, good counsel, personality - these also come within the purview of this star. Anthropomorphically the sole of the feet of Kalapurush.
   
   Revati Nakshatra: Spread from after 16°-40' upto 30th degree in Mina Rasi. Lord Vrhaspati. Deity Pusa, Pusa is the keeper of Cows of the Gods, causes Cow keeping and animal husbandry, protection and nourishing of dependants, foster-father etc. Pusa means the cherishing of	protected	people, nourishment, excellence, increase etc., material enjoyment, wealth, prosperity, superfludity, fatness - these are the attributes of Revati.  Another attribute is that the native of this star advances by leaps and bounds, that it is to say by fits and starts.  Birth Star of Saturn.  Anthropomorphically cavity of the abdomen, groins of Kalapurush.

SIGNIFICATION OF PLANETS

Ravi
   Ravi (The Sun) signifies soul, nature of the native can be judged from Ravi. It represents pomp, power, position in one's career, dignity, self-reliance, prestige, ego, gravity, sobriety, nobility, social leadership, highly placed person in any Governmental  Institution,  political power, king or emperor, a middleaged man, despotism, hot and pungent taste, chemist, druggist, goldsmith, sacrificial places, coronation chambers, bones, head, brain, courage.  It  indicates father, Satwa guna, windy and bilious temperament, a male, Kshatriya, day, east direction. Disease indicated by Ravi: Any disease due to bad biles, disease of head, brain or bone or esophagus, fever, eye-disease, disease of nerve, arteries, veins, lungs or heart. It also causes disease of mouth or cholera. Metal - Gold, Mercury, Ruby. Colour -  Golden colour, red-copper colour. Vocation -  Physician, engineer, administrator  in a Govt Institution. Birth star:	visaka (16) and Anuradha (17). Digit :	12, 33, 48, 70.   Strength - Ravi is strong when he occupies Mesa, Simha or Vrscika Rasi or while full moon is associated with 7, 13, 16 or 17th Stars (Nakshatras). A man may possess Satwa guna if Ravi is conjoined with Chandra but there is chance of his losing power of thinking due to dark moon (Amabasya). The native may be endowed with real Satwa guna if these two planets are posited opposite to each other. In that case the native becomes truly an energetic person and a lover of independence. While in case of a weak Ravi the native cannot easily be successful in any of his endeavours. Combination of Ravi and Sani or if they are opposite to each other, or if Sani is combust the native may experience many changes in his career, suffer from various sorts of troubles, meet with unsuccess in life or pass through many vicissitudes in life.


Chandra (the Moon)
   The Sun is the creator and the Moon is the pr0tector of creation or  it  causes the development of created beings.  It is repository (reservoir] of life and develops energy, vitality, vigour of life. This is why its role is so important and essential in ascertaining child's longivity and physical strength. It signifies mind, mother, woman, tender feeling, love affection, politeness,  socialism, sympathy, kindness, idealism, social work, excellence, physical stature, stored energy, mental happiness, mental strength, family life, happiness and miseries, treasury, people, artistic skills, silk, water, watery things,thinking, love, marriage, fat, marrow, stomach, Satwa guna, phlegmatic disease, salt, cultivation, navigator, milk, manners, psychophysiological consciousness, moral and religious acts, feminine, tenderness, fancies, romance etc. Disease : diseases of stomach, cough and cold, lunacy, diseases of the nerve phthisis, colic pain, intestinai disease, kidney disease.	 Metal: Concbshell, Silver, Mobnstone. It signifies Calcium. Colour: Whiteness. Vocation : clerkship, dealer of silk or fine machineries or business concerning watery things. Birth star : Krittika and Rohini. Digit : 2,5,15,17,49.  Strength : The full moon attains the maximum strength when the sun and the moon are associated with stars (Nakshatras) 3,4,5. When the moon is weak in a man's birthchart or he is associated with his enemy or natural malefic or he is debilitated, the native becomes ficle-minded. When the moon is aspected by or conjoined with Saturn (Sani) the native becomes moody, gloomy, or pensive temperamentally and at the same time he (the native) becomes morose and sorrowful.

    
Mangal (Mars}

Self assertionm daring and initiative temperament, alertness, keen intellect, zeal, enthusiasm, proweess, manliness, struggle for existence, combativeness,  ambition, bravery, courage, enterprising, energetic, aggressive, passionate, brothers	and sisters. battle, war, warrior, army, commander-in-chief, military operation, strife, litigation, accident, obstinacy, organising capability, an excellent mathematician; land and landed property, ownership of land and house, to build a house; fiery  temper, appearance of a bandit or dacoit, prophylactic
medicine, earthquake, scars and wounds, weapons of offence and also defence, blood, cannon, burning gases, iror  and steel; metals or things that grow in ore or under the earth. Mangal signifies intestine, rectum, excretory glands, biles. Tamo guna, bitter taste, a male, Kshatriya, southern direction. Disease : Dysentry, piles, fissure, ulcer in intestine, typhoid, cholera, pox, disease due to morbid condition of wind and bile; accident, boils, gangrene due to any kind of wound; urinary difficulty due to stricture or enlargement of prostate glands. Metal :	Iron, lead. Gem: Coral (Prabal) Colour : Red. Vocation  : Army or police officer, engineer, surgeon, contractor, officer or proprietor of a machinery factory, dentist, chemist, metal worker, all vocations connected with steel and iron industry, bandit, executioner, political agitator. Birth star: purvashadha and uttarashadha. Digit :  3, 10, 39.  Strength: Dark moon when posited in Mesa or Vrscika Rasi, or full moon when associated with Nakshatras ,(Stars) Number 20 or 21. The native becomes energetic, brave and active when Mangal is situated in Upachaya houses (3, 6, 10 & 11th houses from lagna are termed as Upachayas).   When Mangal being the owner of malefic houses is placed in kendra position from lagna the native becomes obstinate, haughty, turbulent.  When the moon is influenced by unfavourable Mangal the native becomes short-tempered and suffers from loss of wealth and luck. Favourable Mangal occupying third house from lagna makes the native skiiful, courageous but powerful Mangal in that house may be the cause bf premature death of the natives's elder brother or sister.


Budha (Mercury)

   Budha is the herald of the day always preceding the Sun. He is always dancing closely around the Sun sometimes preceding, sometimes trailing him (the Sun). Budha rules the mind - the moral mind - the rational brain, pure reason and ability to think logically. Anatomically he is represented by the cerebrum, the larger part of the brain which may be termed as superior brain. The planet Budha signifies education, conscious mind and will. He endows a person with knowledge that can discern good from evil ; he denotes power of speech, memory, wisdom, intelligence, accountancy, accountant, to copy, to commit to memory, or cramming, orator, public speaker, shrewdnes, cunning, dexterity, commerce, publishers, advertisement, childishness, printing, printers, go-between, ambassador, merchandising, partnership, broker, mathematics, versatility, lawyer, hawker, journalism, astrologer, export and import, industries, beauty, elegance, wit, humour, psychological development, refined taste, Rajo guna, betel leaves, nuts and limestone.  He signifies teeth, esophagus,  physical apparatus of breathing, band and mouth, sour taste, temperate disposition. His gender is neuter, and a boy eunuch, convertible, He partakes the nature of the planet with whom be is conjoined. Disease:	head in whirl, epilepsy, loss of memory and  power of speech, disease of the tongue or mouth, dyspepsia.  The planet represents carbon and soda. Colour :  Green like grassblade,
   Vocation: Lawyer, barrister, attorney, astrologer, writer, clerk, journalist, businessman, painter, magician, accountant, auditor, publisher, bookseller, broker, commercial agent. Birth star:  shravana and dhanistha. Digit :  4, 20, 54.  Strength:  When the full moon is associated with Rohini, hasta, shravana or dhanistha, Budha becomes strong. Favourable relation between Budha and benefic Chandra makes the native highly meritorious, intelligent and educated. Again beneficial relation among the Sun, the Moon and Budha enables the  native to enjoy unstained peace of mind and he (the native) can raise himself beyond the material surrroundings  by  practising  'Japa and Tapas'.  Also favourable  disposition  between  these  two planets (Budha and Chandra) endows the native with sharp memory.  A man becomes a poet of extraordinary calibre if strong Budha, Sukra (Venus) and Ravi (The Sun) or the Moon are conjoined together (see Rabindranath's birth chart). Favourable relation among Budha, Vrhaspati (Jupiter) and Sani (Saturn) makes a native a successful astrologer. The native also becomes a successful astrologer when Budha is in a favourable house from lagna (ascendant) and Sukra occupying the 2nd place in the birth chart is exalted in Navamsa Chakra. The native is an engineer when in his birth chart Budha having been associated with 'hasta' Nakshatra (Star No. 13) is placed in a Kendra position from lagna. Temperamentally-beneficial Budha indicates activity, agility, energy, intellect, talent, wit, adaptability. When he is unfavourable the native indulges in illegal practices, be becomes a forgerer, thief, burglar, swindler and racketeer.

Vrhaspati (Jupiter)

   Vrhaspati represents truth, wisdom, the knowledge that enables a man to realise God. He signifies intellect, conscientiousness, merit, intuition, education, peace, peaceful state of mind, power of speech, Vedas, Vedantas, devotion, morality, religiousness, proficiency in arts and sciences, religious institution, temples, sobriety, philosophic wisdom. oratory, invention, idealism, fraternity and equality, universality, University, one who can attain divine bliss, justice, nobility, belief in divine predestination, phlegm, longivity, physical development, the tree full of fruits. Vrhaspati is the judge, the noble judge, the wise judge, he is solomon of all ages, pious, philanthropic. Vrhaspati's native {a Jupitaranian) believes in fraternity and equality, he is sagacious, a friend to all men and beasts alike. He signifies fortune, manliness, reputation, charity. The planet denotes digestive organ, liver, breathing apparatus of the physical body ; he signifies sweet taste, children, father, Brahmin, Northern direction. Disease :  Diarrhoea, dyspepsia, disease of cough and  cold, disease of the palate and throat, asthma, phthisis, epilepsy, thrombosis.  Colour :  Colour of gold, yellow. Gem :	Emerald, yellow sapphire.  Vocation: Priest, jurist, judge, profession connected with Governmntal administration, temple, or ,church, preceptor, professor  in a school or college, philosopher, preacher of religious doctrines, scientist, engineer etc. Birth star: Poorba and Uttar Falguni Nakshatra. Digit :	5, 12, 34, 52, 56, 60. Strength: When Vrhaspati is associated with pushya Nakshatra or when the Sun and the Moon occupy Dhanu or Mina Rasi or when full moon is associated with 11 or 12 Nakshatra Vrhaspati regains his strength. The native suffers from indigestion or similar chronic diseases when Vrhaspati occupies the 2nd or 5th place from lagna due to overeating of sweets and meat. Malefic Vrhaspati occupying a Kendra or Kona place from lagna makes the native an egoist, tyrant and he (the native) wants to rule over his subordinates ruthlessly. When the planet is strong and favourable and ia posited in Kendra or Kona from lagna the native is bestowed with very many qualities such as high education, learning, honesty, morality, intelligence and piety.
   
Sukra (Venus)

  Sukra as a general significator holds absolute sway over this vast domain of knowledge. This is the only planet that can giive you acumen and  intelligence of how to utilise Shastric codes in the practical field of life. For, it knows the intricacies of all Shastras. Moreover influence of Sukra over the adornments of body and luxuries of life is well-known to all astrologic11l pandits. • The  planet denotes fashions, perfumes, all artistic expressions, interior decorating.  Sukra  is  beauty  personified.  The p1anet signifies practical knowledge, desire, passion, sexual pleasure, material  prosperity  and comfort, artistic skill, poetic faculty, music, musician, actor, feminine grace, lustre in the eyes; authorships, dancing,  learning,  amiability,  kindness,  perseverance, vitality, marriage, sexual intercourse, adultery, scandals, dens of prostitutes,	harems,  pomp  and  grandeur, infinite faculties, applied science, young man and  woman, flower, garment, machines,  medicines,  aesthetic, sense, affection, sensuousness, romance, conveyance, painting. It signifies prostate gland, ovaary of a woman, testicle, generating organ, Rajo guna, sour taste, south-eastern or eastern  direction.  Disease: Veneral disease, disease of the uterus or ovary of a woman, diabetes, or disease of kidney, stricture due to gonorrhoea or syphilis, or enlargement of prostate gland, asthma or any other disease due to cough and cold, phthysis.  Colour:  White. Vocation : Engineer, poet, artist, musician, publicity business, or business of advertisement, actor, physician, business concerning conveyance, jewellery or medicinal products, astrologer. Birth star: Magha. Digit :	6, 37, 52. Strength: Sukra is strong  when the  Sun  and the  Moon occupy Vrsa or Tula Rasi, or when the full moon is associated with either of the Nakshatras (Stars), viz, Aswini, Aslesha, Magha, jyesta, mula or revati. Afflicted Sukra by  association with malafics or by occupation in an unfavourable house causes loose morals, Again when Sukra conjoins with or aspected by Sani there is every possibility of late marriage or marriage disregarding the native's social customs	or environments. Friendly aspects between Sktra and Chandra may make the native popular, ambitious and prominent in public lire but the native may be sensuous.

Sani (Saturn)

   Old, infirrm, conservative, animal that is utilised as a carrier  of  heavy loads, lame man, lonely, obstacles, misery, longivity, Yama (lord of death), death, selfishness, reality, mendicant, who practises severe austerity, dutifulness,  a slow ascent after great struggle, retarded results, slow recognition, slim and sickly constitution,  buffalo,  horse, donkey,  goat, oilseed, coal, multicoloured cloth, teeth,  bonee, nerve, hair, muscle, Tamo guna, pungent taste, imprisonment, demoralisation, bondage, servitude,  idiosyncrasies, servant, sorrows, injuries, miners, brick-layers, thieves, risks, drunkenness, gamblers, seeds, oil, cereals, woolen fabrics, architectural skill, iron, lead, whirlwind and storms, low people, western direction. Disease: Rheumatism, gout, indigestion, chron1c dyspepsia, disease of the gall bladder, rickets, disease due to calcium deficiency, deafness, pthysis, consumption. disease of spleen enlargement, insanity. Colour :  Black, blue. Metal :  Iron, lead,  black sapphire (Nilam). Vocation : Mining engineering or engineer, mine owner, coal industry, lead or iron industry, masonry, building and real property, farmer, tannery and leather industry, high officials, business of oil seeds and grains etc, speculative business etc. Birth star : revati. Digit :  7, 39, 49, 56, 72, 82. Strength:	When the Sun and the  Moon	oocupy	makara (capricorn), Kumbha (acquarius) or Tula (Libra) Rasi or the full moon is associated with any of the stars, viz. Chitra, Swati, revati, Sani is strong. Sani signifies obstacles, impediments, and sorrow or miseries, it afflicts the house where it is posited and the native's miseries and sorrows from that house are indicated. A native cannot be a true ascetic unless Sani is strong and favourable. The planet is a gruelling tester of strength and character. It is a blessing in disguise. Sani melts away the dross in man through pain and suffering and by a process of fiery baptism, builds up the native, of course if Sani is favourable. If unfavourable he brands the native with inevitable disaster and doom - even though all other planets might contrive to make him apparently prosperous and successful. He is wrath of God Narayan or rather sorrow of God, imparted to man, made as He is in His image.
   
   
rahu and Ketu :

   Rahu and Ketu are intersection points of the Sun's path and the Moon's, the Nodes. Physically non-existent, in motion they are very  much there, directly exercise their influence which is an intensive and also far reaching as the influence of any other planet.  It is well observed and ascertained fact that the influences of Rahu and Ketu are direct and positive in character, making and unmaking yogas. The Epics relate that when the divine nector came out of the charred primeval ocean, Rahu stole a sip of it and acquired immortality. So, he survived even when Vishnu cut off his head. Thus Rahu is the Dragon's head and Ketu the Dragon's tail, both immortal, that is to say, effective, There is a mythical story to explain the active nodal points.  
   
   Rahu :
   
   The myth explains also other essential features to be considered because Rahu is an Asurha (demon), his passion, lust and greed are consequential. A subtle point about it is that as Rahu has no actual material body, the passion, the greed and the lust are endless and insatiable. Nothing can slake the thirst that Rahu gives the native if he is powerful in the horoscope. It follows from this that insatiable desire causes intense heart burning, sorrow and pain, and to satisfy desire the native would stop at nothing ; the strong Rahu would sweep away virtue and vice alike if it stands in the way. He would not bat any eyelid to do anything that is likely to advance his cause, truth politeness, civility included. A powerful Rahu and propitious would give the native great wealth. It is an attribute of Rahu to enhance or aggravate the characteristics and properties of the houses which it occupies or aspects. If favourable, the result is better than what would have been without Rahu's and if unfavourable worse. Because the nodal points move clockwise, Rahu and Ketu are described as having reverse motion. And some scholars equate this with Purba-Janma (past life). And philosophically this seems to be quite justifiable. If the seven planets, minus Rahu and Ketu and their placing in a horoscope represent their astronomical positions at the  point-instant  of birth.  And if, as the Hindu philosophy believes, the current birth is just one of an astronomical number of births and rebirths, just an urge out of innumerable urges connected like beads on a thread of garland by Samsker - experience. It is quite logical that those should be some planetary force to carry on or perpetuate the continuity. Disease: Indigestion, disease due to accumulated gas or wind. in stomach or intestine. Colour :  Rough black. Metal :  Lead. Gem:  Garnet (Gomed). Vocation :   Any  kind of itinerant job, it gives the profession of the planet with which it i& associated or aspected by. Birth star : Bharani. Digit :  8, 41, 42. Strength: During solar or lunar eclipse or when, the full moon is associated with Bharani Nakshatra or if Chandra, occupies mithuna Rasi Rahu is strong.
   
   Ketu :

   The symbol of Ketu is Serpent. Subtlety and secrecy, indolence and all the inferior aspects of a man's nature are caused or determined by Ketu. One thing however is	important, Because Ketu is a part of Rahu, Yet not a part of it but the other side to it, it represents asceticism. And if aspected by beneficial planet it goes to the farthest length of it by giving the native (of course if well-placed particularly in the 12th house) ultimate self-realisation.
   

Nature and characteristics of Planets (commonly termed as Karakata) described by other eminent Astrologers

   1. Ravi (Sun) : Through Ravi one ought to ascertain a person's copper, gold, father, ownself, prowess, courage, service under King  or  Government, glory,  prosperity, vocation, professional pursuit, acuteness and enthusiasm. He is Kshatriya by caste.
   
   2. Chandra (Moon): From Chandra one ought to determine the welfare of the mother, mind, mental tranquillity,  sea-bath,  white chowri, moonstone, umbrella, good fan, fruits, tenderness, fame, flowers, corn, agriculture, acquisition of pearls, be11-metal, silver, sweet substances, milk, water, cows, good meals, bodily health and beauty. He is Vaisya.
   
   3. Mangal (Mars): Mangal represents strength, energy, valour, daring  act, odium, battle, brothers & sisters, accident, litigation,,sin, piles, fissure, uttering falsehood, cruelty, products derived  from  the earth, landed	property, house, activeness, quarrel feud, kindred. Mangal's caste is Kshatriya.
   
   4.  Budha (Mercury): Budha is the planet that influences one's learning, eloquence,  skill  in fine arts, eulogy from the learned, maternal uncle, dexterity in speech, cleverness in religious meditation and the like, aptness for acquiring knowledge, intelligence, truth-speaking, skill in mechanical arts, any religious rite relating to Vishnu, sacrifice, one's sister's sons or daughters. By caste Budha is Sudra.

   5. Vrhaspati (Jupiter) : Vrhaspati represents knowledge, wisdom, good qualities, teaching, magnanimity, learning, merit, knowledge of Vedas, Shastras and Smrities, reverence to Gods and Brahmins, penance, religious faith, treasure-house, conquests of senses, honour, prestige, personality, compassion, children, minister, acquisition of knowledge of self-realisation, wealth and happiness. He is Brahmin by caste.
   
   6. Sukra (Venus):  One should  know the following following from Sukra, viz. wealth, grandeur,  prosperity, beautitude, pleasure, in poetry, learning that gives material success, triple symphony (union of song, dance and instrumental music), acting, beautiful eyes, vehicles, clothes, ornaments, hoarded goods, happiness, scents, flowers, couch, sport, ministership, charming speech, wife, marriage and festivity, house, sexual  intercourse, addiction to many women and lasciviousness. He is also Brahmin by caste.
   
   7. Sani (Satum) : Sani is an indicator of one's longivity, death, fear, degradation, misery, humiliation, poverty, sickness, reproach, sin, impurity,  misfortune,  resorting to low people, drowsiness, debts, iron, servitude, labourer, agricultural implements, jail and captivity. Sani is a leader of outcasts.



STRUCTURE AND TEMPERAMENT OF PLANETS

   Ravi: Ravi is of bilious temperament. He is strong in bones in the hody.	He possesses a dark-red form and has limited quantity of  hair, his eyes are of reddish brown colour, he has a square-built body, is valiant and wrathful and has massive arms. 
   
   Chandra:  Chandra has a huge body, is both young and old, lean and white, has fine lovely eyes, black and thin hair. She governs blood. She has	beautiful complexion, wears a white garment. She has wind and phlegm in composition and is mild in temperament.
   
   Mangal:  Mangal has a slender waist, curled and shining hair. He has fierce rced eyes, he is bilious and cruel in temperament and is of reddish hue. Ho is wrathful but exceedingly generous. He has a youthful appearance, governs marrow in the body and wears a red garment.
   
   Budha : His complexion is green as the blade of 'durva' or panic grass. His body is full of veins, he has red and long eyes and is clad in green; he governs the skin, is  fond  of fun and possesses even eyes. He is pleasant in his speech and is a mixture of three humours - Vata (wind), Pittha (bile) and Kapha (Phlegm).
   
   Vrhaspati: He has a body of yellowish hue (colour of gold). His eyes and hair are brown. He posesses a fatty body, with elevated chest and big belly. He is phlegmatic in temperament and is exceedingly intelligent. His voice is similar to that of a lion or the sound of the conch.  He is always after wealth.
   
   Sukra: Sukra has black curled hair and very lovely broad eyes. His limbs and body are huge. He has much wind and phlegm in his composition. His complexion is of the colour of Durva Sprout. He has treasured his virile power.
   
   Sani: He is dark in form, lame and has wind in his composition. He has got deep eyes, a lean and tall body full of arteries and veins.  He is idle and is exceedingly calumniating. He is cruel and  has  no pity.  He is dull-headed.  He has got large nails, teeth, stiff hair, and limbs. He is dirty and is of sinful disposition.  He is fierce and is a personification of anger. He is ripe with old age and wears a black garment.  He governs the muscle in the body.
   

ABODES OF PLANETS

   Ravi : Ravi generally moves in all open area where there is light. He lives in a temple of Siva and in a place where there is no water. Ravi signifies Eastern Quarter.
   
   Chandra : Chandra lives in a place where there is Goddess Parvati, the place is occupied by women, full of water, herb and plant and the spot is also full of honey or liquor. Chandra indicates North-West Quarter.
   
   Mangal: Mangal lives in places where there are thieves or low people, the place is one where there is fire, it is a battlefield too. Mangal indicates Southern direction.
   
   Budha : Budha moves in places where there are learned men. His place of choice is the spot where God Vishnu is kept. He likes an assembly, a recreation ground and a mathematical hall. Budha indicates Northern direction.
   
   Vrhaspati: His places of liking are Treasury, the Aswatha (Peepul) tree, or the dwelling places of Gods and Brahmins. Vrhaspati signifies North-Eastern direction.
   
   Sukra : His a bode is courtesan's quarter, the harem, dancing hall, bed room. He indicates South-Eastern direction.
   
   Sani: He lives in places where there are only low and outcast people, his liking is dirty places and his house ii dilapidated leaf-thatched hut, Direction is Western Quarter.

Specification of Influences of Planets on different Bhavas (houses)

Ravi	governs 10th bhava, vocation, profession.
Chandra governs Mind, 4th bhava, mother.
Mangal  governs 3rd bhava, brothers & sisters.
Budha   governs 2nd ( power of speech, eloquence ), 4th (Education & Learning) & 6th bhava (Kins).
Vrhaspati governs 2nd, 5th, 9th & 11th bhavas.
Sukra	governs 4th & 7th bhavas.
Sani	governs 3rd & 8th bhavas (longivity)


 
A few important Planets, their various moods & derivative influences.


   The various moods of the planets vis-a-vis the different houses are most important for all astrological purposes. Basically however it will be perceived that from a realistic point of view they are also essential to the setting up of an integrated mathematical structure, twelve houses which are by no means natural, but altogether man-made on the basis of exhaustive observation, set off against nine planets, are the coping-stones of the mathematical edifice, It is now further complicated, with the aid of further researched observation by the introduction of the working hypothesis of planetary moods.
   
The fundamental symbolism are as follows:

   Ravi the sun is taken as a symbol of Atma {the soul); the Moon of the mind; Mangal (Mars) of energy; Budha (Mercury) of nimbleness of wit and intelligence; Vrhaspati (Jupiter) of learn ing and wisdom; Sukra (Venus) of material plenitude; Sani (Saturn) of sorrow and effort; Rahu and Ketu because of their vacuum they symbolize everything that all the houses primarily stand for  In these categories, the subtleties and variations are numerous.
   
   Ravi : The Sun is the lord of the Solar system. The Hindu sacred books refer to him as the "Lord of the Earth" and a creator, preserver and destroyer. So, if the Sun is good and strong in a horoscope, posited in any of the 3rd, 6th, 10th or 11th houses or aspects the 10th, the house of Karma, it follows that the native will be favoured by the king and would be eminent. At least he would occupy a high position in life. If however the Sun is joined or aspected by Saturn it causes a lot of impediment in native's rise - his favourable disposition in relation to other benefics is to some extent adversely effected. If the Sun is badly positioned - the 6th, 8th & 12th houses are considered to be bad house - his rise is obstructed. The Sun is also the symbol of father and if he is placed in the 6th the relatives on the father's side cause the native considerable annoyance and pain. The Sun also stands for vitality, if favourable he increases, if bad  diminishes  it.  Curiously  enough  the Sun, who is the brightest, most effulgent visible God in the Hindu pantheon, the lord of the earth and the symbol of the soul has been classed as a papa graha (natural malefic planet), It can be explained only on the hypothesis that the Sun is also responsible for the final destruction of the Earth at the time of "Maha-pralaya" (the great Dissolution) when the Sun operates through 12 replicas of himself.  Not a very convincing explanation but the only one that occurs to us. The Sun as also the Moon are particularly concerned with infants' danger to life - Indian Astrological term is A-ristha or Bala-ristha yoga. Infants' longivity be cut short if they are badly posited.
   
   Chandra (The Moon) : The Moon is said to represent the mind and this has bearings on also such aspect of Hindu mythology as lie outside astrology proper. To take just one example :- One name of Shiva is 'Chandra-churha', the moon being on his brow. The implication is, Shiva, the ultimate summit, rises higher than the mind to a point which the mind approaches but cannot reach. In other words, the sublimation of the mind and to get beyond it-that is the fullest realisation. In astrology it represents also the Mother, if in conjunction with malefic Rahu or Sani, the mind is considered to be afflicted and is seldom at peace. The disturbance in poise pursues the native in his social life. The moon is the cause of emotional exaltation or depression as the case may be. A favourable moon tends to make a man an idealist. A too favourable moon is again like too much of a good thing, it would rob a man of all practical or pragmatic virtues. He would lose himself into a morass of emotion.  Such a moon might enhance a native's religiosity. If Vrhaspati and Sani are in favourable conjunction with or are related to Moon and Vrhaspati in his own house which is Kendra or Kona the religiosity is bound to be there. The importance of the moon in calculating an infantile danger (Aristha) is as great as that of Ravi.
   
   Mangal (Mars): The general among the planets, bestower of all military virtues and toughness. Incendiary in character, antipodal to Sani (Saturn) in attitude and methods but complimentary  to Sani in various ways in working out the pattern of life. While Sani is freezing Mangal is fiery. While Sani is slowest moving of all planets (name 'Sanaischara' makes it self-evident) Mangal is very quick. He upsets all careful slow going human calculations. While Sani is normally the planet of poverty, slothfulness, Mangal is generally a planet of process, valour and niches and also a planet of wealth (if favourably disposed). While Mangal lives in a Fort of Castle, Sani lives in leaf-thatched hut, while Saturn is symbolised as a very old man Mangal is symbolised by youth. In the 2nd or 9th house Mangal is the cause of sorrow being extremely unfavourable. Bad luck and poverty invariably follow. If Mangal is debilitated in a Kendra the results are good. In makara (Capricorn), Mesa (Aries) and Vrscika (Scorpio) Mangal gives rise and promotion if any of those houses is the 10th or any other 'Upachayasthan', as already said Mangal in the 2nd or the 9th, spoils luck but if it is Mangal's exalted position or own house this does not happen. Mangal in the 3rd house generally kills off the elder brother or sister.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter III is deleted 
page 69 - 109
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER-IV

GENERAL RULES FOR DETERMINING MERIT OF MOODS OR BHAVAS

1. First rule: Certain planets have been described as auspicious and certain others inauspicious. In determination of moods also this division into auspicious and inauspicious is expected. Of the moods, the 4th, 5th, the Lagna, the 9th and 10th moods are auspicious ; the 6th, 8th and 12th moods are considered to be inauspicious. The 7th and 2nd moods are considered to be mixture of both. If a naturally benefic planet is the lord of an unfavourable ( inauspicious ) house the results are considered to be inauspicious in an overall way, though the natural goodness of that planet is not altogether lost. Besides all these the 3rd and 11th bhavas (or moods) are considered to be unfavourable and together with the 6th, the trio is described as "tri-sarhayadhipathi' (3rd, 6th & 11th). The lords of these trio houses (bhavas or moods) are also considered to be unfavourable. It may be added however that the house for income (i.e. the 11th house) is by no means wholly devoid of good attributes. The good may be reduced but some of it will be there. The 3rd, 6th, 10th & 11th are called "Upachaya" houses, and in these houses naturally malefic planets give good results.   The influences of naturally benefic planets in conjunction with or aspected by other benefic are good. If they occupy or aspect any bhava they will do good to that bhava. But if the same bhava is influenced by both auspicious and inauspicious planets, results will be mixed. The point of difference is that whichever of the two ( i.e. auspicious and inauspicious) is stronger he will make more of its characteristic contribution.
   
2. When the benefic planet is aspected by or is in conjunction with an enemy planet that would weaken the both and the result will be determined by the strcnger one. This means that if the enemy planet is stronger the result will not be favourable and in case of the stronger benefic the result is expected to be slightly favourable.


3. A natural benefic or a  malefic planet if combust or is posited in an unfavourable bhava {the 6th, 8th and 12th bhavas are termed as unfavourable) is considered to be weak and is not expected to give favourable result.

4. Nicha Vanga Yoga: When a planet is debilitated and the lord of that rasi occupies his exalted house the debilitated planet regains his strength.	For instance, vrhaspati (Jupiter) is debilitated in makara Rasi (Capricorn) and Sani, the lord of makara Rasi is posited in Tula (Libra), vrhaspati regains his strength though he is in his debilitated house.	Again, if a debilitated planet is in conjunction with another planet that occupies his exalted house, the former regains his strength. As for example: Budha is in Mina Rasi which is Budha's debilitated house and is in conjunction with Sukra (Venus) there in Mina Rasi. Budha is no longer weak, or Sukra in Kanya Rasi is in conjunction with Budha, or Mangal in karkata is associated with vrhaspati and so on. These planetary relations are called Nicha Vanga Yoga. Renowned Astrologers have described other Nicha Vanga Yogas, which are as follows :
(a) If a planet is debilitated and the lord of the house where that planet is situated occupies his own or Mooltrikona house this is also a Nicha Vanga yoga. Some astrologers are of opinion that if the lord of the sign (rasi) where the debilitated planet is situated occupies his own or mooltrikona or friendly house Nichavanga Yoga occurs.
(b) Again "Kumar Swamyam" a most important Tamil book on astrology is of opinion that both the debilitated and exalted planets when conjoined with each other and are placed in a Kendra from Chandra then only Niclla Vanga Yoga occurs.
(c) According to "Phaladipika" if the debilitated  planet is aspected by the lord of the house where the planet is debilitated then also this yoga occurs.
(d) If the debilitated planet is aspected by or is in conjunction with the lord of the house where that debilitated planet is exalted Nicha Vanga Yoga is to be admitted. Such as, vrhaspati's debilitated house is makara (Capricorn) and Karkata (Cancer) is his house of exaltation and lord thereof is Chandra. Now, if debilitated vrhaspati is aspected by or is in conjunction with Chandra vrhaspati regains his strength due to the aspect of Chandra.

5. When a planet occupying an inauspicious house is aspected by or is in conjunction with a benefic planet his unfavourable result will be mitigated to some extent.

6. If the lords of the 6th, 8th or 12th are related to each other by exchange of their houses, or by conjunction or by mutual aspect the unfavourable results of those houses represented by the planets are mitigated and good result may be predicted. This is called "Viparita Raja Yoga". As for instance, if the lord of the 6th house occupies the 8th from lagna or there is
change of aspect or houses then the bad result expecting from both the 6th and 8th houses is diminished and favourable result ensues.

7. If the bhava or its lord are not strong, good or bad result whatever it may be should not be expected.
(a) When a house (or sign) is occupied by a benefic planet but the lord of that house is either weak or in an inauspicious. house under such circumstance it may be slightly difficult to give correct verdict. This is to be noted that the lord of the house is the primary factor for consideration. If the lord of the house is favourably disposed and strong, the bhava under consideration is expected to. give desired result.
(b) Again if the house under question is occupied by a malefic, the house (i.e. the bhava) will be weak no doubt but the good result will not be lost but one should say that good result may be attained through some strenuous effort.
(c) If the lord of the house in question is weak that weakness cannot be repaired fully inspite of occupation of a benefic planet in that house, only the unfavourable result due to weakness of the bhava-lord may be diminished to some extent. Similar deduction may be made, in case a bhava is occupied by a malefic but the lord thereof is strong and favourable.

8. While considering the merit or demerit of a bhava the bhava under consid_eration is to be taken as a lagna and if there are beneficial planets in Kendra or Kona from that lagna and the lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th places from that bhava (which we take for the present as lagna) are favourably placed or the bhava is not influenced by the aspect of or conjunction with the lords of dusthanas (viz. 6th, 8th or 12th lords from the original lagna) and/or the bhava is aspected by or is in conjunction with auspicious planets the bhava or its lord or both will impart good result.
(a) If an auspicious bhava-lord occupies a Kendra or Kona house from lagna both the bhava and its lord are favourable and beneficial result will yield.
(b) If that lord of the auspicious bhava is placed in any inauspicious  house ( 6th, 8th & 12th houses ) from  that bhava the bhava-lord under consideration becomes weak and unfavourable.
   
The rule No. 8(a) & 8(b) needs further elucidation to remove misunderstanding arising out of such directives. Say for example, the lord of the 9th house (house of luck) while occupying the 4th place from lagna is expected to give good result as the 9th lord is in Kendra from lagna. But according to rule No. 8(b) the 9th lord being in the 8th place from the 9th bhava should not be considered as favourably disposed. So, the lord of the 9th house may be considered as weak and unfavourable. Now, it is apparently evident that two rules No. 8(a) & 8(b) are self-contradictory. Then how to compromise between these two opposite directives? Under such circumstance the finding should be that the native shall be prosperous, and lucky ( as the 9th lord is in Kendra from lagna) but initially there may be difficulties and various kind of obstacles in getting good results ( because the 9th lord is placed in the 8th place from the 9th house ).

9. A weak bhava-lord inspite of his favourable ownership occupying a Kendra or Kona house from Lagna cannot yield favourable result upto expectation.
(a) If a bhava-lord is combust, debilitated or in any other way weak good result should not be expected.
(b) Similarly if a planet otherwise strong, is aspected by or is in conjunction with the lord of the 6th, 8th or 12th house favourable result will be diminished to a great extent.

10. A natural malefic when situated in an Upachaya house yields good result. [3rd, 6th, 10th & 11th houses are called Upachaya house]. We have already indicated that 6th, 8th& 12th houses are called Dusthanas meaning malefic or unfavourable houses.  6th house is both an Upachaya and Dusthana.  So in case of a natural malefic being in dusthana (6th house) which is at the same time an Upachaya house what would be our finding ? In such contradictory directives the readers should adjust their reasoning and give their verdict as reasonably as it should be. As for example, Sani ( Saturn ) is a natural malefic and in a native's birth chart he as the lord of the 9th place occupies the 6th from lagna. As the lord of the 9th house while associated with the 6th place Sani though in Upachaya can not be favourable so far the native's luck is concerned.  But this should be noted that Sani is posited in a Kendra from the 9th house ( 6th place is the 10th house from the 9th ). So, he is favourable, he is in Upachaya-sthan, this is also a favourable position. Therefore we may safely come to a conclusion that if the planet ( Sani ) is not otherwise unfavourable Sani will prove favourable to the native and he!p him prosper in life.

11. Any planet occupying the 2nd or 11th house is said to be favourably disposed and is expected to give the native money or wealth etc. But if the planet owns dusthana ( i.e. 6th, 8th or 12th house ) he will be harmful in respect of the native's earning and wealth. But this is to be remembered that any planet, be he the lord of any of the dusthanas occupying the 11th house will help the native earning money but due to ownership of an inauspicious house the native shall have to strain bis nerve to earn money.

12. A planet just in cusp of two bhavas loses his capacity to give any beneficial result, on the other hand a planet in the middle position of a bhava gives the exact result be it favourable or unfavourable.
(a) A planet while crossing the midpoint of a bhava approaches towards the cusp and loses by and by its strength to impart desired result. Again when a planet approaches the midpoint of a bhava he regains its strength.
(b) While a planet crossing the midpoint of a bhava approaches the cusp he can initially give slightly good or bad result as the case may be, but in the long run he cannot give any result whatsoever.

13. It is said that a planet in or near the cusp cannot give any result, this does not mean that the planet has no strength to yield any result at all. When it is said the planet cannot give any result when he is in the cusp of a bhava it means that the planet's position in the bhava is absolutely ineffective, but the planet is expected to give the result of the rasi he occupies and of the Nakshatra with which he is associated.

14. If the nature of the planet and the nature of the house it occupies are in tune with one another then the character of the effects to be expected of such a combination becomes clear and well-defined.	If they do not agree they cancel out one another, never completely but partially. Take the following illustration: Sani is in the Mesa ( Aries ).	Mesa is a house fire intensive whereas Sani is antipodal to fire. Fire gives brightness, light, and also rapid dynamic effects, whereas Sani is slow,dull-looking and more or less static, Then again, Sani is debilitated in Mesa Rasi. So, a combination of these would amount to an intensification of the darker and more unpleasant aspects of  Sani. There would be a sort of working syntheses, but it would be jerky or fugitive.

15. The constellation (Nakshatra) with which the planet is associated adds its quota to the amalgam. It would enhance or diminish as the case may be the quality of the resultant of the combination. For instance, vrhaspati gives good effect in Pusyam Nakshatra (Constellation), on the other hand in Aslesha Nakshatra vrhaspati is slightly weak because neutral and out of tune. But as the rasi is Karkata the weakness of vrhaspati would not effect much, because the house itself has considerable affinity with vrhaspati.

Summary of the rules indicated above

In judging a house the following points must be considered first :

1. The location of the lord of the house, his st;ength, whether he is aspected by a benefic and at the same time a friendly planet. If the same lord is in conjunction with a benefic or with a malefic, a friendly or an enemy planet.

2. The strength of the bhava and its lord.

3. The natural characteristics of the bhava and bhava-lord, the influence of aspect on them by another planet-auspicious or inauspicious must be taken into consideration.

4. Position of the bhava-lord or the nature of the planet that occupies the house ( bhava ) under consideration, their strength or weakness due to their position in Navamsa chart are to be examiued thoroughly.

These points were discussed in previous pages and to alert our readers we have again summarized them, which will help them give correct judgment.

When a planet is considered weak ?

1. When Ravi is in conjunction with or aspected by Sani both of them are to be taken as weak.
2. While Chandra is in conjunction with or aspected by either Sani or Rahu Chandra becomes weak and unfavourable.
3. When Sani and Mangal aspect or conjoins with each other both of them become weak and unfavourable.
4. Budha while in conjunction with or a&pected by mangal Budha becomes unfavourable.
5. Similarly, when vrhaspati conjoins with or is aspected by Rahu, vrhaspati is weak. Conjunction of Sukra & Mangal or Mangal's aspect on Sukra and Rahu's conjunction with Ravi and Mangal are taken to be unfavourable. In such cases vrhaspati, Sukra, Ravi and Mangal will be more unfavourable.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Remaining part of Chapter IV is deleted 
page 117 - 119
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER V
INDICATION OF BHAVAS

   While considering the merit or demerit of a house (henceforth we shall call it a bhava) it is the bhava not the rasi the most important factor. Na vamsa is next or equally important point. Hindu astrologers attach much importance in Navamsa Chart. They call it the life vivration of a planet or in other words liveliness of a planet is to be judged from a Navamsa Chart.
   
The First Bhava

The first bhava indicates the health of the native, consti tutions and structure of the body, countenance, character, nature of the person, complexion, longivity etc. All these qualities as already said in previous chapter may be subjected to many changes by the influence of aspects and the position of planet or planets situated in the bhava and also due to position of the bhava-lord in any auspicious or inauspicious bhava or by conjunction with malefic or benefic planet. Let us take an example. 

If vrhaspati occupies Simha Rasi where lagna is posited and lagna and vrhaspati receive no full aspect of any other planet or they are not in conjunction with any one, the reading may be summarized in the following manner. Colour of Simha Rasi is dark red, and colour of vrhaspati is gold-like yellow. In Navamsa chart vrhaspati is in Karkata. If the lagna lord Ravi is not influenced by black-coloured planet such as Sani the native's complexion should be yellow and white mixed, slightly dark red hue may be mixed with yellow and white colour. He will be good looking, eyes are prominent, nature is temperate, he will keep good health etc.

Again, if the lord of lagna is not well-disposed rather aspected by his enemy Sani who is the lord of the 6th and 7th houses or Ravi is in conjunction with Sani or Rahu the native inspite of vrhaspati's position in lagna may not be keeping good health. The native may suffer from such ailments of Sani or Rahu or both and also of Ravi to some extent. vrhaspati's effect  on  lagna is no doubt good but he will not be able to  protect the native all the time from suffering from ailments referred to above. Again vrhaspati's strength is also of primary consideration. If vrhaspati is strong in Varga-charts specially in Navamsa Chart he (vrhaspati) will have definitely a favourable influence in matter of health of the native provided Lagnadhipathi (lagna-lord) is not seriously damaged. On the other hand if Lagnapathi Ravi is well-disposed or attached with Lagna or in a friendly house without being malefically influenced by any unfavourable planet the native is sure to keep good health and shall be endowed with many virtues.

Position of the lord of the 1st houses in different bhavas and results thereof.

1st Lord in the 1st  house : If the lagnapathi is posited in lagna the health of the native is expected to be good, his physical structure is excellent and he becomes a liberal-minded man. If the Lagna pathi is a natural malefic and is situated in the 1st house the native shall not always be keeping good health or if the same lord occupies any other Kendra or is associated with Chandra ill health of the native is possible, but if he occupies in any Kona {5th or 9th house) or 11th house the native may keep good health. If the lagnapathi is weak or debilitated or combust or he is posited in any dusthana (6th, 8th or 12th house) the native will be lean and thin and sickly. If the Kendra and Kona houses are not occupied by any malefic and vrhaspati being the lord of lagna occupies the 4th or 8th house the native lives upto 100 years and keeps his health free from any disease; he is happy and pious.   Again, a powerful lord of lagna aspected by benefics but unaspected by malefics occupies a kendra position from lagna the native is blessed with long life and never meets an unnatural death. When lagnapathi vrhaspati or Sukra is situated in a kendra position the subject will become a rich man, is dear to the king and is blessed with long life. When lagnapathi aspected by benefic and occupies a moveable Rasi (sign) the native becomes a renowned man, beautiful to look at and luxurious. When any one of Chandra, Budha, vrhaspati and Sukra is posited in Lagna or in Kendra the native has an appearance of a king. If lagna is occupied by Rahu aspected by Chandra and "Gulika" is posited in Navamsa lagna birth of twin children is possible. If the lagna-lord is weak, debilitated or combust the native will become sickly, evil-minded, and infamous. When the same lord occupies the 12th place in the Na vamsa chart the native may roam about aimlessly and never enjoys peace of mind.

1st Lord in the 2nd house : If the lord of lagna occupies the 2nd house (dhana house) with the lord of the 2nd the native may be wealthy and his treasury may be full of silver, gold, precious metals and stones. He will have peaceful family life, his attempts to prosper in life may be fruitful. But in the Navamsa chart if the lord of the 2nd house occupies any dusthana (6th, 8th or 12th place) from the rasi where the 2nd lord is posited in the birth chart the good effect will be much less. The native may be sickly but pious.

1st Lord in the 3rd house : This is a good sign for the native to have the 1st lord in the 3rd house in his birthchart, because the native shall be persevering, peinstaking and a mighty man. His brothers and sisters will be prosperous. He will be endeared by persons of both sexes. If the lagnadhipathi occupies any dusthana from the lord of the 3rd house in the Navamsa chart the native may have enmity with his brothers.

1st Lord in the 4th house : The native shall have his own house, vehicle and lands. He will command respect from his friends and relatives. Acquaintance with learned men and formation of new friends of high social status will also be the effect due to the position of lagna-lord in the 4th place. These good effects will be enhanced if the lord of the 4th house also is there in the 4th place from lagna. Relation with his mother, near relatives and friends will be vitiated if the lagnapathi is in any dusthana in the Navamsa Chart from the 4th lord.  Further, he may sustain monetary loss, may be involved in accident and litigation.  Effects of similar  nature may be predicted if the 4th house is occupied by any lord of dusthanas or any lord of dusthana is conjoined with lagnapathi and lord of the house.

1st Lord in the 5th house :  If the strong lagna-lord occupies the 5th house and there is equally strong 5th lord in the same place the native shall be endowed with many qualities and he shall be a learned and intelligent man. He will earn the grace of the king (Government of his time), may be a minister, ambassador, or a high Government official. He may not be quite happy about his sons. This is a yoga of political prosperity.  The good effect may be nullified and quite opposite result may be predicted if in the 5th house there is any planet owning dusthana or in the Navamsa chart the lagnapathi occupies 6th, 8th or 12th house from the rasi held by the 6th lord.

1st Lord in the 6th house :  If the lagnalord alone is posited in the 6th house the native shall vanquish his enemies, he will be able to win over all obstacles, will be a respectable man and rich. But if the 6th lord is there with lagnalord or lord of lagna receives the aspect of lord of 6th, 8th or 12th house, the native shall suffer from many ailments, enmity with cousins, failure in all undertakings, poverty etc. But the salient point is that if the 6th lord is debilitated and lagnalord is strong favourable result may be predicted.

1st Lord in the 7th house : If the 7th house is a movable rasi and lagnapathi is posited there along with 7th lord the native will go on pilgrimage and also travel over many distant countries, if the 7th house falls in a common rasi he will undertake journies to foreign countries. If lagnapathi is stronger than 7th lord or both of them are equally strong the native will be profitted by such journey and if lagnapathi is weaker than the 7th lord the journey will be profitless. It is a very unfavourable yoga when lagnapathi occupies any dusthana from the 7th lord in Navamsa chart. In such case the native becomes very poor, has no means of livelihood, he will be defamed and shall always quarrel with his wife. Lagnadhipathi in the 7th house may indicate premature death of wife or husband as the case may be.

1st Lord in the 8th house : When the lord of lagna is in the 8th house it is a very unfavourable yoga, there is no doubt about it.  The native may be plunged in heavy debt, suffer from misery and poverty, he is an evil-minded man and never thinks of honest things. This result will worsen if lagnapathi is in conjunction with 8th lord. But unfavourable result may be much minimised if lagnapathi is strong and 8th lord is weak. In any case the native will indulge in sinful acts.

1st Lord in the 9th house :  The native will be a righteous man, popular, devoted to father, elders and God. These favourable results will be much enhanced if the lord of lagna is in conjunction with 9th lord. The father of the native will have prosperous time during the dasa-antardasa of Lagnapathi and bhagyapathi (9th lord). When both the lords or at least either of them is strong on account of their positions in the house of exaltation or Swakshetra (own house) or acquire strength in Vargas there is possibility of influx of much wealth. If in the Navamsa chart lagnapathi occupies any dusthana from the 9th lord or vice versa the native may be involved in litigation with regard to ancestral property. Generally lagnapathi in the 9th house makes the native a man of aesthetic sense, he will be an intelligent, efficient and lucky man.

1st Lord in the 10th house : The native shall be prosperous, wield respect and honour from men of high circles, he shall have good administrative service provided the lord of lagna is powerful and conjoins with equally powerful 10th lord. His parents will be happy and the native also will do his best to please them (parents).

1st Lord in the 11th house : If the native is a businessman there will be much gain through business, he will be benefitted through his elder brother's effort. If he is an officer in any institution during the dasa and antardasa of lagnapathi and lord of the 11th house the native will earn good money provided both the lords are strong and are situated in ihe 11th. If in the Navamsa chart the lagna lord and lord of the 11th house are posited in dusthana from each other the result will be unfavourable.

1st Lord ln the 12th house :  If lagnapathi along with the 12th lord occupy 12th house the native shall be plunged in debt, he shall be a very poor man and shall pass his days in distress. He shall be a man of haughty temperament and a man of loose morals.


Dhana bhava ( or the 2nd house )

Dhana bhava signifies Financial Prosperity, wealth (particularly accumulated wealth), Family, relatives, speech, mouth, tongue, eyes (vision). Initial rules in judging a horoscope are also to be applied at the time of analysing the dhana bhava. It is needless to repeat here that in dealing with all houses the same rules as said before are applicable. First of all (1) the house, (2) its lord, (3) aspect on the house or/and its lord, association  with  them,  (4)  planets  occupying  the  house. (5) position of natural karaka (indicator) etc. The same rules are to be considered in Navamsa chart also. There are a few planets that give unfavourable result with regard to dhana bhava. They are Ravi, Mangal primarily and Sani and Rahu or Ketu secondarily. Besides the lords of dusthanas (6th, 8th and 12th) when placed in dhana bhava will not give good result even if they are naturally friendly to the lord of the 2nd, and/or their aspect on the 2nd bhava is not beneficial to dhana bhava. But waning moon or malefic planets (except Ravi and Mangal) if they are wealth-giving planets in a birth chart will help increase the native's wealth. Planets occupying or asecting the 2nd house if predominently indicator of wealth in a chart will give wealth to the native in their dasa and antardasas. So also the dhanpathi's effect.  If the lord of the 2nd house is posited in his own house, in his house of exaltation, in his friend's house or gains 'Gapuramsa' Varga (if a planet gains 4 Vargas of one planet it is called 'Gapuramsa' Varga) or if the 2nd lord is posited in Kendra or Kona house from lagna the native becomes rich and passes his days cheerfully. If the 2nd house is occupied by an exalted planet or the same occupant is in his own or mooltrikona house and at the same time the 2nd lord acquires strength in Vargas the native becomes sweet tongued and his words will be infallible.


If the lord of the 2nd and 9th houses being the one and the same planet is posited in the 2nd house and also is aspected by a benefic his words also may be infallible.
If the 2nd lord conjoined with or aspected by benefic occupies Kendra or Kona house the native becomes pious, orator and protect or maintains relatives.
If the 2nd lord is situated in highest exalted point, either conjoined with or is aspected by vrhaspati and is posited in Kendra or Kona house from lagna the native becomes a world famous person.

Eye-disease : Eye sight (vision) is to be judged from the 2nd house.
(1) If the lord of the 2nd house in conjunction with lagna lord is placed in any dusthana there is possibility of complete loss of eyesight.
(2) If the 2nd lord, Sukra, and Chandra together occupy lagna there is possibility of night blindness.
(3) If the lords of the 2nd house and lagna togethor conjoined with Ravi and Sukra occupy any dusthana the native may be blind since his birth.
(4) When Mangal aspected by a malefic occupies the 12th house from lagna loss of left eye sight is indicated, Similarly when Ravi aspected by a malefic is situated in the 12th from lagna loss of sight of right eye is indicated.
(5) If the lords of lagna and of the 2nd house in conjunction with Sukra are posited in any of the dusthanas the native may be squint-eyed.

Dumbness : Power of speech is judged from the 2nd house and its lord.
(1) If the lord of the 2nd combines with Budha, and Rahu or Ketu or the lord of the rasi where Rahu is posited owns the 2nd house and is situated in the 6th place from lagna the native may lose his power of speech during the dasa•antardasa of the 2nd lord.
(2) The 2nd lord being in conjunction with vrhaspati if placed in the 8th place from lagna the native may be a dumb.
(3) If the 9th Navamsa of Karkata, Vrscika or Mina Rasi is afflicted by a malefic and Chandra in Vrsa Rasi is aspected also by a malefic planet the native may be a dumb, but instead of malefic aspect on Chandra if he is aspected by a benefic the native restores his speaking power after 5 years of age.
(4) If the 6th lord Budha aspected by a malefic occupies either Karkata, Vrscika or Mina, or, if said Budha {the lord of the 6th house) being in coujunction with Mangal is aspected by a naturally unfavourable planet and occupies lagna the native will be dumb, he can only make a queer sound of "Go-Go".
(5) If the Muka-yogakaraka (the planet that makes a man dumb)is placed in any dusthana but the place is planet's own house, or house of exaltation the result will not be unfavourable.

Indication of disease from the second house :
(1) The native may be attacked with chronic dysentery if the 2nd house is occupied by Rahu or Sani.
(2) If there are Chandra and Rahu in the 2nd house the native may be suceptible to cold and also he may be attacked with typhoid fever.
(3) If Sukra or Mangal occupies the 2nd or 12th house the subject may be attacked with disease of the ear.
(4) If Chandra is associated with his enemy or is placed in the 2nd place which is the house of his enemy there is danger from water. ( Ordinarily Chandra has no enemy , here enemy means temporarily enemy).

The Yoga that makes a man a liar : If the lord of the second house is conjoined with a  naturally unfavourable planet and another malefic occupies the 2nd house the native is a habitual liar and suffers from morbid affection of the nervous system.

The Yop that makes a man rich : If the lagna, dhana and Ayasthan (11th  house) are  occupied by their respective lords the native becomes rich. Our readcn may get general idea of 'dhana' yoga if they remember the following combination of planets or relation among those planets :
(1) Any two of the following seven bhavas viz., lagna (1st), 2nd, 4th, 5th, 9th, 10th and 11th, if related to one another either by combination, aspect or exchance of places, may confer wealth to the native. Permutation and combination of these bhava lords will be the guiding factor to determine the dhana yoga. dhana karaka (wealth giving planet) Vrhaspati does not aspect the dhanasthan (i.e. 2nd house) even the specially brilliant dhana yoga does not yield desired result.

Daridra yoga (Poverty) : The same theory as noted above is applicable in determining 'Daridra Yoga'. That is, if the planets that form dhana yoga are malefic due to their positions in unfavourable houses or aspect of or conjunction wirh malefic planets the native may suffer from poverty. This is a general rule. The malefic effect may be modified or lessened owing to aspect of or assoiation with favourable planets. But there are special 'daridra' yoga (yoga of poverty) which are considered to be aimost infallible. These are :
(1) If Ravi, Sukra and Sani are combined together even a king may be a pauper.  But if Ravi is posited in Mesa Rasi and is associated with Budha, and is aspected by vrhaspati the native is expected to be rich.
(2) Combination of Chandra, Mangal, Sukra and Sani in any sign (i.e. Rasi) will definitely result in poverty.
(3) When Ravi and Sani together occupy the 2nd place from lagna the subject suffers from loss of money and also monetary stringency is possible, but if these planets are aspected by a benefic planet unfavourable result should not be predicted.
(4) If there is no planet in the 10th house from lagna, the 11th house from Ravi and in the 8th house from Chandra the na1ive becomes a poor man. This is a very unfavourable yoga.
(5) If the 4 Kendras i.e. lagna, 4th, 7th and 10th are occupied by malefic planets the native suffers from poverty till his death.
(6) If there is no planet excepting Ravi in 2nd and 12th places from Chandra, and Chandra and Kendra positions do not receive aspect of any benefic planet it is 'Kemadrooma' yoga. This is a sign of poverty and the native passes his days through many vicissitudes of life. If Chandra is aspected by vrhaspati the bad effect of Kemadrooma yoga is much minimized.
(7) Mangal in the 2nd place from lagna is said to be very unfavourable even though he is a yogakaraka planet, (in case of Karkata & Simha lagnas Mangal is called a yoga-karaka planet).
(8) Ravi, Mangal and Sani, are said to be naturally very unfavourable planets, their lndian equivalent term is 'Krura' ( cruel or mischievous ) planets. If these krura planets occupy the 2nd place without being aspected by any naturally benefic planets and at the same time if they are combust, debilitated or conjoined with any lord of dusthana the native has no means of livelihood and suffers from extreme poverty.
(9) If the benefic planets occupy any dusthana and malefic planets are situated in kendra or kona house the native anyhow is able to manage his two meals but it is a great predicament for him to arrange his clothing.

Results of the lord of the second house(or bhava) occupying different bhavas (houses)

(1) 2nd Lord is In 1st place (Lagna) - the native may be a businessman and rich, but he will be miserly, greedy, passionate and lacks polite manners and may hate his own kith and kin. But the native will earn money by his own effort, inte1ligence or learning.  If the 2nd lord being in Lagna joins with the lord of luck (9th house) or the Sun the subject may get property and wealth by inheritance.

(2) 2nd Lord is In the 2nd place - The  native  may  be  wealthy  and enterprising, he feels proud for his wealth. He may marry twice or thrice and even then he remains childless. The native cannot take delicious or nutritious food if the 2nd lord is afflicted by malefic planets.  Again his  children  may  be sickly and he is unhappy in his conjugal life.

(3) 2nd Lord is In the 3rd place - The native shall be brave, conscientious but obstinate, well-mannered but he may be a man of immoral character and addicted to luxuries. If the 2nd lord in the third house is strong and is aspected by or conjoined with benetlcial planets his brothers or sisters may be of great help to the native and bis artistic faculties, viz., art of music or dancing may be developed and he may be profited thereby.

4) 2nd Lord is In the 4th house - The subject will be rich, kind-hearted and truthful ; he may be blessed with long life.  If the 2nd lord is a naturally malefic planet without receiving any aspect of a favourable planet the mother of the native may fall badly ill during the dasa-antardasa of the 2nd lord.   Again, if the 2nd lord is fortified by the aspect of or conjunction with a benefic planet the native may earn good amount of money through agricultural pursuit or automobile business. Further he may be benefited by maternal relatives and may inherit his father's property.  If the 4th house or its lord along with the lord of the 2nd is afflicted, the native shall have to sustain monetary loss heavily.

(5) 2nd Lord is In the 5th house - If the 2nd lord in the fifth house is well-fortified there is a chance of unexpected gain or wealth through lotteries or favour of the ruler of the land. The subject may be doing good works no doubt but his miserly habit may be a talk of the day, because he will be reluctant to spend the least amount of money for his house-hold affairs.  Even he shall not be readily agreeable to spend anything for maintenance or education or his children. His children may be honest and lucky, the native may be sensual and lack manners due to affliction of the 2nd lord in the 5th house.

(6) 2nd Lord is In the 6th house - The subject may acquire wealth through unfair means such as black marketing or other deceitful work. For his own financial gain he may create misunderstanding and trouble between his friends and relatives. If the 2nd lord combines with the lord of the 6th house and both of them are strong, suspicious dealings with friends and relatives may be anticipated and he may be accused of forgeries and perjuries or breach of trust. If the 6th lord is a natural benefic the native may sustain loss of money due to activities of enemies but the enemies will be subdued.

(7) 2nd Lord is In the 7th house - Both the husband and wife may be sensual, particularly the wife who may be a person of questionable moral character. When the lord of the 2nd associated with the 7th lord is posited in the 7th house and both the planets - particularly the 7th lord, are strong the native may earn money through foreign sources. He will be a business man and shall visit many foreign countries to promote his business. When the rasi or Navamsa held by the 2nd lord happens to be a feminine one the native will be benefited by a woman.

(8) 2nd Lord is In the 8th house - If the 2nd lord is situated in the 8th then there is little or no chance of happiness in conjugal life. Relation with his elder brothers or sisters are not cordial. The native will inherit ancestral property, or wealth from some other source; he will have no earning and ultimately accumulated wealth or property may be squandered. If the 2nd lord is strong there is a chance of fair earning but loss of money also is equally possible.

(9) 2nd Lord is In the 9th house - If the 2nd lord is in the 9th house the subject will be efficient, skilful, and lucky; he will be sickly in young age but will maintain good health afterwards. This yoga is very favourable one, the native shall earn money through different sources and shall inherit wealth or property.

(10) 2nd Lord is In the 10th house - When the 2nd lord is associated with the 10th house the native shall he held in high esteem by almost all classes of men, even his superiors and elders shall show respact to him. He will be a learned man, and shall earn fairly well by dint of his own effort. He may be childless, the result depends on the character and strength of the 5th house and its lord.

(11) 2nd Lord is In the 11th house - The native may be a hotelkeeper or a banker or moneylender. Health in his childhood will not be good, he will earn huge money through the business stated above but he will be unscrupulous.

(12) 2nd Lord is In the 12th house - This is not a good sign to have the lord of the 2nd posited in the 12th house. The native may be extravagant or may be bound to spend much more than his income and may be involved in debt. There are favourable results too. He becomes a very respect able man and may hold a Governmental post. He is not happy with his elder brother and eldest son.

The Third House

The third house rules brothers, sisters and relatives in general. It signifies medicine, food specially fruits, courage, throat, ears, father's death. While judging the third  house the following factors should be looked into viz.,(a) The strength or otherwise of the bhava and its lord, (b) Planets occupying the bhava,(c) Natural indicator of the third bhava. Besides general rules to assess the merit or demerit of a bhava or its lord are to be applied which will help the reader, arrive at a correct decision.

Third house denotes exclusively brothers and sisters. So, standard and authoritative books on astrology deal with brothers aod sisters first and subsequently other matters are taken into consideration. 

1. If the third house is occupied by very malefic planets or the lord of the third house or the Karaka planet {viz., Mangal) is associated with very unfavourable planet the native loses his brother or sister in his/her childhood.
2. If Karaka planet Mangal occupies his debilitated house either in birth, or Navamsa Chart or Mangal is in malefic sasthyamsa ( 1/80 part of a Rasi - See Varga charts) or conjoined with a malefic the birth of brothers or sisters is possible only to meet with early death.

Sarvarthachintamony, an authoritative book on astrology,  says that if the Karaka planet Mangal becomes extremely malefic as stated above the birth of a still-born brother is certain. The readers must be very careful in applying this rule before giving their judgment. Example / Case Study [ Because it was found in some cases that aspect of a favourable planet on Mangal saved one or two brothers of the natives inspite of their serious illness. Let us give an instance - In case of dhanu lagna third house is occupied by Sani, Ravi, Budha and Ketu, and Mangal is in the 11th house(Tula Rasi) with 8th lord Chandra who is a natural papa. Chandra and Mangal are aspected by lagna-lord vrhaspati who is situated in the 5th house.   The third lord Sani is combust, between two malefic Ravi and Budha, aspected by Rahu. Mangal is with 8th lord Chandra but aspected by favour&bie vrhaspati. The younger and elder sisters of the native died very early, the youngest brother though seriously ill at the age of 5 years survived and still alive. This is only possible as Mangal is aspected by vrhaspati and Sani is exalted in Navamsa chart ] So correct decision about the third house and its lord depends on a carefui examinition of many more things.

3. If the lord of the 3rd house and Karaka planet are posited in the 8th house from lagna and are aspected by malefics, early death of brothers and sisters may be anticipated. If that 8th house is owned by a malefic and the lord thereof is associated with an unfavourable planet early death of brothers and sisters is more certain.

A  few yogas  that indicate early death of brothers and sisters :
(3a) The third house is associated with or aspected by a malefic and the lord of the 3rd house is hemmed in between two malefics.
(3b) The 3rd lord will be unfavourable due to above reasons and his position in his debilitated house in Navamsa, at the same time no benefic will cast his aspect on the 3rd house or its lord.
(3c) The Navamsa lord of the 3rd lord is combust and in the 8th house and debilitated.
(3d) The third lord is joined with Sani or Mandi, or debilitated and is aspected by a malefic.
(3e) The lord of the third house is posited in the 3rd, is aspected by a malefic or is in malefic Sastyamsa.
(3f) The lord of the 3rd house is in the 8th place and his Navamsa lord occupies the house of a very malefic planet.
(3g) The Navamsa lord of the lord of Navamsa of the 3rd lord is in his debilitated or inimical house.


4. The  third lord or Karaka planet Mangal if posited in any dusthana or is associated with and aspected by a malefic will produce bad effects so far death of brothers and sisters are concerned though the occupy their houses of exaltation.

5. The yogas that confer the native being blessed with brothers and sisters :

(5a) The 3rd house is associated with and aspected by benefic planet and the 3rd lord is strong.
(5b) The Karaka planet Mangal being placed in the 3rd house and powerful, will give good result in respect of brothers and sisters if at the same time Mangal is in conjunction with or is aspected by a benefic.
(5c) The lord of the 3rd house, the Karaka of the 3rd bhava ( Mangal, naturally governs the 3rd bhava ) if posited in their houses of exaltation, in their own or friendly houses or in their own Vargas in Navamsa Chart.
(5d) The 3rd  lord  is a natural benefic and acquires Gopurvarga and Mangal the ruler of the 3rd bhava ( i.e. K.araka of the 3rd bhava ) also is in Simhasan varga.
   
If a planet acquires 4 vargas of his own is said to be in 'Gopur' varga and when a planet in 5 vargas of hie own is said to be in 'Simhasan' varga.

6. Affinity with brothers and sisters - When tile 1agnadhipathi ( lord of lagna ) and the lord of the 3rd house are  friendly to each other relation with brothers and sisters will be cordial. If however, they are inimical to each other there is least chance of sweet relation between the native and his brothers and sisters.

7. The 3rd lord and character of the native :
(7a) If the 3rd lord being in conjunction with a benefic is placed in a favourable Navamsa the native becomes sober and temperate.
(7b) The  lord  of  Navamsa  of  the  lord of the 3rd house if ,placed in his own or exalted house in Navamsa chart, the native will be steady in all his endeavours, he will be an intelligent warrior and experienced diplomat.
(7c) When the 3rd lord acquires Simhasan, Gopur or Parabata varga ( 6 vargas of his own ) and is aspected by or conjoined with benefic the native becomes a veteran first rate warrior.
(7d)(i)	When the lord lord is associated with Ravi the native becomes gentle-natured and calm.
(7d)(ii) When 3rd lord is associated with Chandra, the native becomes steady in all his endeavours.
(7d)(iii) When he is conjoined with Sani he will he fatuous.
(7d)(iv) When he is associated with Mangal the native will be a man of bad temper
(7d)(v)	When he is in conjunction with Budha the native will be pious.
(7d)(vi) When he is joined with vrhaspati he will be conversant in all shastras, a great scholar and sober.
(7d)(vii) When the 3rd lord is conjoined with Sukra the subject will be higbly libidinous.
(7d)(viii) If the same lord is in conjunction with Rahu or Ketu the native outwardly appears to be strong-minded but inwardly a weak man.

8. Indication of diseases and other unfavourable results from tlle position of 3rd lord :
(8a) If vrhaspati with the 3rd lord is posited in lagna, danger from four-footed animal particularly cows may be anticipated, and if the lagna-rasi is a watery sign, danger from water also may be apprehended.
(8b) If the 3rd lord is associated with Rahu or with the lord of the sign where Rahu is posited there is danger from snake.
(8c) If the 3rd lord being in his house of debilitation is posited in the 6th house an4 also is aspected by a malefic or he is combust the native may be poisoned by somebody or accidentally he takes any poisonous drug etc.
(8d) The native suffers from any kind of disease in throat if the 3rd house is occupied by malefic planet particularly if Gulika ( or Mandi ) is there in the third house along with other malefics the disease in throat is a strong and sure possibility.
(8e) If the 3rd house is occupied by Sani, and Gulika also is there, the native shall be attacked with rheumatism.
(8f) The lord of Navamsa of the lord of the sign where the 3rd lord is posited if placed in Kendra and conjoined with and aspected by malefic and there is no aspect of a benefic cast on the same Navamsa lord the native may be attacked with diseases in Ear.

Positions of the lord of the third house in different bhavas and results thereof - 
1. If 3rd lord is in the 1st house - The native  earns money  by his  own effort and becomes rich ; he is illiterate, lean and thin, brave, sickly and serves others. When the 3rd lord is strong the native becomes a good actor and makes good name as a musician and dancer.
2. If 3rd lord is in the 2nd house - The native shall be morally depraved, unscrupulous and a mean-minded person ; generally he is unhappy.
3. If 3rd lord is in the 3rd house - The third lord in the 3rd house is a favourable yoga. The native becomes brave, wealthy and happy.  He shall always be adored by his friends and relatives.
4. If 3rd lord is in the 4th house - The wife of the native shall be a mean and cruel-hearted person ; he himself will be rich and learned.
5. If 3rd lord is in the 5th house - If the 3rd lord is well-fortified in the fifth house the native's relation with his brothers will be cordial and he will be benefited by them but he will not be happy about children. As a Government Servant he shall prove his efficiency and shall hold very high position.
6. If 3rd lord is in the 6th bouse - Native's brothers may be very rich, but he hates them, his enemies shall give constant trouble. His relation with his maternal uncles will not be cordial but he will be dear to his maternal aunts. When the 3rd lord is well-fortified in the 6th house, one of his brothers shall be a successful physician and another an army officer. If again both the 3rd and 6th lords join together in the 6th house, the native may he a good sportsman and athlete. If these two lords are afflicted the native ahall suffer from various kinds of diseases and enemies will give him trouble every now and then.
7. If 3rd lord is in the 7th house - The native may incur displeasures of rulers and may be punished. If the 3rd lord is very much afflicted the native may even be sentenced to death. Of course if lagna and the 8th lord are well-fortified there may not bo capital punishment. If the 3rd lord is well-disposed in the 7th, the native's brother or brothers may live in a foreign country and will help the native. The afflicted 3rd lord in the 7th house doee not make a person morally strong unless the lord of the 9th house ( called house of religion) and also the lagna-lord are strong and well-disposed. If these two lords are not well-fortified and the 3rd lord is unfavourable the native may hanker after other's wife.
8. If 3rd lord is in the 8th house - The 3rd lord in the 8th house is an unfortunate yoga with regard to one's health. The native may be attacked with serious and dangerous diseases. The native may be inolved in a criminal case; this yoga denotes unhappy conjugal life and bad luck all through his life until and unless the well-disposition of the lords of 9th and 10th houses ore assured in the birth chart.
9. If 3rd lord is in the 9th house - Indication of  favourable  luck  after marriage. The native may be benefited by his brothers. His father will be cynic and a cruel-hearted man.  The native may have
strained relation with his father if the 3rd lord is afflicted.  He may undertake long journey.
10. If 3rd lord is in the 10th house - The native's wife will be quarrelsome, cruel-hearted and unfaithful. He himself will be rich, happy and intelligent and his brothers will shine well in their vocational career and will be of great help to the native.
11. If 3rd lord is in the 11th house - If the 3rd lord is well-disposed in the 11th house the native may earn good money by his own effort and lead a decent life. If the 3rd lord is afflicted he becomes vindictive, may be serving others or dependant on others, and is liable to suffer from many diseases.
12. If 3rd lord is in the 12th house - The native gets fortune through his wife but he is to pass through many ups and downs. His father is a cruel-hearted man, and the younger brother of the native will be a dangerous fellow and for his fault the native may sustain heavy loss of money. These unfavourable results may be modified if the 3rd lord is strong in Navamsa Chart, aspected by favourable planets.

The Fourth House

The 4th house signifies mother, education, mental condition, vehicles, house, general happiness, prosperity, property - particularly immovable property.  In determining the student's merit in academic career 4th house and its lord play an important role though the disposition of the 5th and 10th lords should not be overlooked. The Karakas of the 4th bhava are vrhaspati, Sukra and Budha of which vrhaspati stands for learning and wisdom, and Sukra and Budha for such education that helps the man enjoy material happiness. So, in considering the academic success of a native the Karaka planet's disposition also is to be taken into account. If the lagnadhipathi is not well-fortified simply favourable disposition of Karaka planets and of the 4th lord cannot give brilliant result in respect of university education.

(a) If the 4th lord is favourably posited either in the 4th or in any other favourable house and the favourable planets are situated in any dusthana the native shall not be altogether deprived of good result expected from the 4th house, though the good result will be lessened to some extent. On the other hand occupation of malefic planets or of lords of dusthanas in the 4th may mar the tranquillity of the mind and other malefic effects regarding the 4th house are possible.
(b) If the 4th house and its lord, favourable planets and strong Karaka planets are situated in the 4th place, or those benefic planets cast their aspect on the 4th house or its lord, or the 4th lord joins those favourable planets the native shall be highly educated, modest, disciplined and intelligent.
(c) The native cannot do well in his educational career, and he cannot be a man of sharp intellect if the 4th house and its lord are afflicted owing to aspect, or association of malefic planets or the position of 4th lord in any dusthana.
(d) Sukra denotes wife, Chandra mother, and Ravi father. Again when birth is at day time Sukra governs mother and Chandra governs mother when birth is at night.

[ The planet that attains maximum degree is called Atmakaraka - ruling planet ( if Rahu attains minimum degree he is called Atmakaraka ), the planet whose degree is second to the first one is called Amatyakaraka. In this manner Bhatrikaraka, Matrikaraka, Putrakaraka. Jnatikaraka and Jayakaraka planets are determined. In case of Rahu being Atmakaraka, Amatyakaraka planet will be one who has maximum degree among other six planets. ]

Concerning Mother's death
(1) Subtract Ravi's sphuta from Chandra-sphuta. The result will be some rasi, degree, and Kala or Minute; when the transit (Gochar) Sani or vrhaspati will pass over that rasi and amsa or on the 5th or 9th rasi and amsa from the newly found rasi and amsa, the death of the mother may be predicted.
(2) Subtract the rasi and amsa of Ravi from the rasi and amsa of the 8th lord from Chandra, when transit Sani or Ravi passes over that newly found rasi and amsa, mother's death may be apprehended.

Astrologers must be cautious in predicting the period of death of any person. Because, Death can not overtake a person before his turn to leave this mortal world comes. In such cases, when astrologers see that the person will live some years more they will predict illness of that person during the transition of Sani or vrhaspati over that newly found rasi and amsa.

Nature of disease of mother
(a) Powerful Ravi and Mangal when posited in the 4th house the mother of the native may suffer from diseases due to faulty secretion of bile and she may also be attacked with carbuncle or tumour etc.  There may be a scar on the right side of the native's body and he can not maintain cordial relation with his friends. These results are outcome of the positions of Ravi and Mangal in the 4th house.
(b) If the 4th house is occupied by either Sani or Rahu  the mother of the native may suffer from morbid affection of the nervous system or she may fall seriously ill owing to application of any kind of poisonous drug or she may be involved into an accident from fall on any spacious stone.
(c) If Chandra being associated with Sani or Rahu is posited in the 4th house, the mother of the native becomes sickly.

Longivity of the mother 

Full Life or Purnayu :
(a) When the 4th house and  Matrikaraka  planet  are associated with favourable planet and the 4th lord is powerful. 
(b) Powerful Chandra  being  in  favourable  Navamsa  is aspected by Sukra or Budha and occupies any of the 4 Kendras or that Chandra will be posited in the favourable rasi from the
4th house.
(c) The lord of Navamsa of lagna - Navamsa-lord when, associated with the Sukhapathi ( 4th lord ) and is posited in a Kendra from lagna or in any Kendra from the Moon.


The yoga  that confers happiness

(a) When powerful lord of the 9th house is associated with Sukra and occupies the 4th house the native enjoys happiness till his death.
(b) When vrhaspati is comparatively more powerful than lagnadhipathi and is in conjunction with favourable planets or is posited behveen two benefic planets, at the same time he occupies the 4th house, the native becomes a leader of the people and enjoys happiness.
(c) vrhaspati's aspect on the 4th lord, and when he is posited in the 7th place, or 7th place is occupied by any other benefic planet or Budha being in the 7th house is posited between benefic planets. This yoga makes a man happy and a leader of the :,eople,
(d) The 4th lord vrhaspati acquiring 'Gopuramsa' and the 2nd, 10th and 11th houses are occupied by planets the native leads a very happy life.

The yogas that confer unhappiness

(a) The 4th lord joined with malefic planets and posited in malefic Navamsa and the 2nd, 4th and 5th places are associated with debilitated planets. Under this yoga the native lives in distress and is very unhappy.
(b) When the 4th lord associated with Ravi and Mangal is in malefic Navamsa and is not aspected by any benefic planet the native lives in great distress.

Ownership of Vehicles

(a) When powerful Sukra and full moon occupy Kendra or Kona houses the native commands many conveyances.
(b) When the lord, of the Kendra where the powerful 4th lord is situated occupies lagna or there is exchange of houses between 10th and 11th lords the native becomes prosperous and possesses many conveyances.
(c) If the 4th lord associated with Chandra, vrhaspati and Sukra is situated in lagna and these three planets ( Chandra, vrhaspati and Sukra) are not weak or malefic in any way, the native owns three kinds of conveyances.

Ownership of houses

(a) The 11th house is occupied by powerful benefic, and lords of lagna und the 4th house are very strong, or the 4th lord acquires 'Gopur' or 'Simhasan' Varga the native owns a palatial building.
(b) If the lord of lagna is in the 4th and the 4th lord is in lagna ( i.e. when there is exchange of houses between them ) the native rnay build a house of his own very easily.
(c) If the 4th place falls in a movable sign and the 4th lord and Karaka planet too are posited in movable sign (or Rasi} the native builds houses in many places. Under this yoga if the lords of the 2nd, 11th and 4th houses are placed in Kendra or Kona places all the buildings referred to above are good and well built
(d) If the powerful 4th and 10th lords are situated in Kendra or Kona houses the native shall own beautiful buildings.

Loss of houses

(a) If the inimical planet of lagnadhipatbi occupies lagna there is possibility of loss of house in his ( Enemy's ) dasa and antardasa.
(b) The dasa-antardasa of inimical planet of the 4th lord may be the cause of destruction of houses and death of friends.  If that dasa-lord happens to be Sani, Mangal or Gulika the native shall have to suffer from serious type of worries and anxieties.

Concerning possession of landed property

(a) 4th lord is in the 10th and 10th lord in the 4th and Mangal attains full strength; under this yoga the native possesses many landed properties.
(b) If the 4th lord acquires Gopur varga and is posited in the 5th place from lagna the acquisition of many landed properties may be predicted.
(c) Navamsa lord of the lord of the sign where the 4th lord ia situated may help the native's brother acquire much wealth and landed property if that Navamsa lord, is aspected by a friendly planet.
(d) If the lord of the 7th and Jayakaraka planet are situated in the 4th house and  the 4th lord is in the 7th and they are friendly to each other, acquisition of wealth through wife is possible.

Acquisition of wealth buried underground

(a) If the lords of the 2nd and 11th houses are in the 4th,
or
(b) If the powerful lord of the 4th is posited in the 9th house owned by a benefic and also 4th lord is associated with benefic planets,
or
(c) If  the  powerful  lord  of the  house, associated with a benefic is placed in the 4th house owned by benefic planets,
or
(d) If the lord of the 2nd house being in conjunction with the 4th lord is conjoined with a benefic and also is placed in the 9th place from a favourable planet.

The owners of birthcharts having been endowed with any of the above yogas may acquire wealth buried under the earth.


A few special yogas based on 4th house - 

(a) If the 4th house is occupied by Sani with Chandra in his house of exaltation and vrhaspati aspects both Chandra and Sani the native's mother dies early ; he will receive western education and will be an author at his early age.
(b) If the 3rd house is occupied by Budha, the 4th lord is well-disposed, the native will own splendid mansions.
(c) If the 4th house is associated with Sani, Rahu or Ket11 the native will be dishonest and may ind11lge in fraudulent schemes.

Position of the lord of the 4th house in different bhavas and results thereof
1. 4th lord is in the 1st house - The native becomes highly  educated but is afraid of speaking in public meetings or assemblies. He may be deprived of ancestral property.
2. 4th lord is in the 2nd house - The person will be very fortunate, courageous and happy. He will have chance of inheriting property from maternal grandfather.
3. 4th lord is in the 3rd house - The native will be a man of very poor health, generous and a man of character.  He will be rich  by dint of his own effort and intelligence ; may suffer very badly due to activities of step-mother and step-brother.
4. 4th lord is in the 4th house - The person  will  be rich, respected and happy. He will be a religious-minded man but sensual.
5. 4th lord is in the 5th house - He will be a devotee of lord Vishnu, popular and becomes rich by self-effort. He may acquire vehicles.
6. 4th lord is in the 6th house - The person will have evil thoughts and intentions. Short-tempered and mean-minded fellow as he is he will be very unpopular and will be roaming about without any peace of mind.
7. 4th lord is in the 7th house - He will be owner of lands and houses. If the 7th house falls in a movable sign ( rasi ) be will earn his livelihood in a distant place from his birthland; if that house falls in a fixed sign, he will be employed in his own birthplace.
8. 4th lord is in the 8th house - The native may be plunged into miserable circumstances, he may be impotent, his father may die early, and may be involved into litigation and lose his landed property.
9. 4th lord is in the 9th house - The native will be fortunate, he will have his own properties, his father too will be lucky and the native himself will be prosperous and happy. Of course if the 4th lord is afflicted or 9th lord is unfavourably posited the good results will not be predicted or astrologers should be cautious in making favourable predictions.
10. 4th lord is in the 10th house - He will be an expert chemist and a successful politician, he will be an illustrious personality to be adored by great men of the world ( provided the 4th and the 10th lords are powerful). If the 4th lord is afflicted there is chance of loss of reputation.
11. 4th lord is in the 11th house - The person will be a self-made man and will rise to the positiou of eminence. He will be generous and sickly. His mother may be fortunate.
12. 4th lord is in the 12th house - The person shall have to lead a miserable life due to poverty and will be deprived of mental peace. Early death of the mother is possible


CHAPTER-VI

THE FIFTH HOUSE

The fifth house denotes intellect, talent, devotion to God, royal favour, secret counsel, education and learning wisdom and children. The fifth  place  is primarily  termed as  place  concerningchildren ( Putrasthana). The Karaka planet is vrhaspati. But while giving judgment about children the fifth place from Chandra, vrhaspati and the 9th house are to be examined carefully. One may get children from those planets as well as the 5th and 9th lords during their dasa and antardasas. If the 5th or 7th place from lagna or Chandra is occupied or aspected by or conjoined with benefic planets good results may be predicted about son and wife both, on the other hand if those places or their lords become malefic due to aspect of or conjunction with unfavourable planets we can  not expect any good result about children and wife. Before we give our judgment about children we must first of all ascertain whether there is any sign of barrenness in the native's chart. We therefore shall take up those yogas that may make a person sterile. They are as follows :

Signs of sterility :
(a) If the 5th place is occupied by 2 or 3 malefic planets and lagna is aspected by the enemy of lagnadhipathi the native and his wife ( vice versa ) become barren.
(b) If lagna rises at makara or Kumbha with Sani there or Sani's aspect on lagna without receiving any aspect of or association with any benefic the native's life-partner becomes barren.
(c) If lagna rises at Karkata or Simha rasi and the 7th place from the lagna is aspected by or associated with Sani the native may be barren.

In  case  of  both (b) and (c) rules sign of barrenness will be taken as nullified if Sani becomes otherwise strong in Navamsa Chakra, or Kendra position or the lord of the 5th house receives the aspect of or is in conjunction with any benefic.
Let me cite two examples :
(i) Lagna is in Kumba with Sani there, the 4th house from lagna is posited by vrhaspati. The native is the father of 13 children.
(ii) This is the birth chart of Mrs. Indira Gandhi, Lagna is associated with Sani, and Chandra is in the 7th place from lagna, the 5th lord Mangal is in the 2nd place. Sani in Navamsa Chakra occupies his own rasi makara and he is therfore strong. Here 5th place from lagna is aspected by vrhaspati a natural benetic and the lord of bhagyasthana { 9th place ).

(d) If the lagna is associated with Sani, and Sukra is situated in the 7th place from lagna or the 7th place is occupied by Ravi and Sani the native shall be barren in both the cases provided vrhaspati has full aspect on the 10th place from lagna.
(e) If the 5th place is aspected by a malefic and the lords of the 2nd and 5th houses are weak the native shall have no issue inspite of more than one wife. If the native gets a child and the 5th house is aspected by the 6th lord Budha the child born to him is to be taken as bastard.
(f) vrhaspati in the 5th house is said to be ineffectual so far concerned with children unless the 5th place is aspected by its lord. vrhaspati alone in the 5th place may give one or two children only and the native will seldom be happy about them.

A woman who bears only one child : 
The 5th place signifies womb of a woman and the 8th place denotes genital organ. If these two places and/or their lords are influenced by malefics the disease in the sexual organs may be anticipated, and in such cases the native { a woman) may not have any issue.

Yogas concerning that result are given beiow :
1. If the 5th lord is conjoined with a malefic planet and combust or the debilitated 5th lord is posited in the 6th place.
2. If the debilitated 5th lord occupies 8th or 12th places and the 5th place is associated with Budha and Ketu.
3. If the 5th lord does not cast his aspect on the 5th place occupied by Budha and Sani.
4. The 5th place is occupied by vrhaspati and from vrhaspati the 5th place is occupied by Sani and from Sani the 5th place is occupied by Rahu.
5. If the 5th lord without receiving any aspect of a favourable planet is posited in the 5th place the native gets a few children.
6. Similarly if vrhaspati alone occupies the 5th place the native gets a few children, of course if the 5th lord aspects the 5th house this yoga (of getting a few children) is nullified.

The following Yogas signify birth of one child & Yoga concerning a woman giving birth to dead children:
7(a). If these three places, viz. 6th, 8th and 12th are occupied by malefic planets the native in case of a woman's birth chart, will give birth to still-born or dead children, in case of man's birth chart the native may not have any issue at all.
7(b). If the malefic planets are situated in the 5th place and from vrhaspati's position the 5th place is occupied by Sani or Mangal and the lord of lagna is posited in the 2nd place, children of the native shall be shortlived.

Yoga of childlessness in a woman's Rasi-Chakra ( birth curt )
8. If in a woman's birth chart Janma-rasi(rasi where Chandra is situated) falls in Karkata, Vrscika or Mina and Chandra in Navamsa chakra is situated in the 7th house from the native's lagna with Sukra there and Jata-lagna is associated with Sani without any planet in the 5th place from Lagna - the woman becomes barren.

Further there are special rules of testing yogas that confer a man or a woman children at proper time or at bit late in age etc, The rules are stated below :

According to a woman's rasi chakra : Add together the degree, amsa & kala of Chandra, Mangal and vrhaspati, if total figures thus obtained indicates even rasi the woman may have children, If the Navamsa rasi obtained from that total figures also indicate even rasi the native must get children. If these figures indicate odd rasi and Navamsa rasi shows even rasi the child may be born to the woman after timely treatment by a competent physician. If both of them signify odd rasi, the lady shall have no child at all.

According to a man's rasi chakra : Add together the degree, amsa & kala of Ravi, vrhaspati and Sukra. If the total figures thus obtained indicate odd rasi the native shall have children. The possibility of getting children will be more certain if the Navamsa rasi determined from those figures too falls in an odd rasi. If however one is in odd rasi and another is in even sign, birth of children may be possible after the native undergoes thorough medical treatment. If both the rasis indicate even sign no child may be born to the native.

9. Birth of children very late in age : Maharshi Parasar says :
9(i). If Mangal be the lord of lagna and is posited in bis house of exaltation, and Ravi and Sani together are situated in the 8th place the native gets a son very late in age.
9{ii) If the 5th house is occupied by Budha, Sani and vrhaspati and the 5th lord is posited in lagna or in any beneficial rasi or
9(iii) If Sani is in lagna, vrhaspati in the 8th place and Mangal in the 12th and the lord of the 5th house is weak --
The native gets children very late in age.

10. Adopted son :    The native may adopt a son under the following configuration of planets in his birth chart :
(i) The 5th lord is posited in the 9th, Chandra is situated in a malefic house and 5th or 9th place from Chandra is occupied by lagnadhipathi.
(ii) If the 5th house from lagna is owned by Budha or Sani and that house is aspected by Sani, or Gulika is posited there.
(iii) The 5th is owned by Chandra who is situated in lagna, Sani occupies the 5th house and vrhaspati attains full strength,

Other important things about the 5th house and its lord.

It was already stetcd that 5th house denotes intellect, talent devotion to god, wisdom, children etc. vrhaspati mainly rules over talent. intellect, learning, wisdom and children. Budha and Sukra signify among other things, intelligence, education and knowledge. So if  a  man's  intellect,  wisdom  etc.,  are to be judged primarily position of vrhaspati and  5th  house and its  lords to be looked into, if the 5th house is associated with a favourable planet or the house is situated between two benefics and Vrhaspatti is posited in Kendra or Kona house, the native's intellect and talent may be developed. If the 5th house is occupied by Budha and Sukra the native is able to utilise his intelligence in practical field and may attain success in his academic career. If Ravi is in the 5th house the native will be sober. Chandra there will make him fickle-minded. Mangal there makes him mischievously inclined. Budha makes him  temperate. Sukra in the 5th house makes a man of slow intellect and Sani and Rahu in the 5th house will make him man of perverted intellect. The 5th house indicates intestine, liver etc. If the 5th place is situated in a watery sign with any watery planet the native may pass liquid stool. If the 5th house falls in a dry or windy rasi  with  dry  planet  there  the  native  may  suffer  from constipation. The 5th house also denotes penance, religious austerity, devotion to Gods, spiritual initiation.  So, if the 9th house and its lord and 5th house and its lord are favourably disposed the native will be religiously inclined and will be overwhelmed wi1h sentiment of devotion. If the lords of the 5th and 9th houses are natural denoters of moral goodness, the qualities referred to above will be developed gradually more and more. Sukra also rules over divine qualities. So, if he is in the 5th house or being the lord of the 9th is posited in tho 5th the native  aspires after acquiring divine qualities. Again if Sukra being in the 5th house joins Sani  the native has an	unswerving  devotion  to  God and become an austere devotee.


11. Yogas that meke man an author : Authorship is to be determined from the 5th bhava.
11(a) If Chandra or vrhaspati is posited in the Navamsa rasi where atmakaraka planet is situated, or
11(b) Any of these two planets are situated in the 5th or 9th place from atmakaraka Navamsa rasi, or
11(c) If the 5th or 9th place from lagna ( of the birth chart) is occupied by any of those two planets the native becomes an anthor.
11(d) If Sukra joins Chandra the native will be an author of mediocre standard and shall earn moderate name and fame.
11(e) If Chandra joins Budha the native shall be an author of ordinary calibre.
11(f) If Chandra joins both Budha and Sukra he will be an illustrious author and shall be a poet, dramatist, fiction and story writer, a nevelist and historian too.
11(g) If  Chandra  is conjoined  with vrhaspati  along with Budha or Sukra the native shall write books on philosophic and other serious subjects. If Budha, vrhaspati and Sukra join Chandra the native shall write books on astrology, medicine, philosophy, art and accountancy.
11(h) If Rahu or Ketu joins Chandra and any two among Budha, vrhaspati and Sukra are associated with them the native may he vastly learned in mathematics and astrology.

12. Yogas causing sharp intellect: Budha is the natural indicator of intelligence.
12(i) So, if Budha is powerful and well-disposed, and the 5th lord is aspected by a benefic or the 5th house is associated with a favourable planet,
12(ii) If the 5th lord at his highest exalted point casts his aspect just on the bhava-madhya of the 5th house,
12(iii) If the lord of Navamsa of the 5th lord is aspected by a benefic,
12(iv)  If Navamsa lord of Budha is posited in Kendra or Kona and is aspected by the 5th lord,
12(v) If the lord of the 5th house being posited in the 9th is aspected by a benefic or occupies an auspicious house,
12(vi) If the 5th house is situated just between  two favourable planets,
12(vii) While 5th lord is in the 9th place, vrhaspati in the 5th and 5th bhava is posited between two benefics,
12(viii) If the 5th place being associated with a benefic is situated between favourable planets and vrhaspati is posited in Kendra or Kona the native will be a man of sharp intellect.


13. If Sani occupying the 5th house aspects the lord of Lagna and the 5th lord conjoins with a malefic planet the native slowly becomes intellectually dull.

14. The native loses his memory if Sani, Rahu or Gulika is situated in the 5th place and the 5th lord is aspected by a malefic planet. Of course inspite of this yoga if Budha is associated with a favourable planet the subject slowly regains his memory.

15. In most cases it was observed that the native loses memory if the 5th lord joins an unfavourable planet and be in malefic Sasthyamsa ( one-sixtyeth part of a rasi ).

16.  If the 5th house falls in Prithwi rasis ( Vrsa, Kanya & makara rasis) the native will possess retentive memory, imagination and deep feeling.

The  5th house is considered as a house of emotion and virtue or piety. If the planets that signify these qualities are posited in the fifth house, and the character of that sign is consistent with the planet or planets situated therein, the emotional side of the native will be developed. If the horoscope does not show any other unfavourable disposition of planets the native can not be corrupted. Rather he will be more and more religiousminded if vrhaspati and the 9th lord also are favourable.


Results of the lord of the 5th house occupying dilferent bhavas.

5th Lord is in the 1st house : According to Parasari Hora, if the 5th lord is situated in lagna the native becomes evil-minded, a miser even he will not part with a single pice from his pocket. Thia may be the result if the 5th lord is afflicted, under that circumstance the person may be a cheat, a leader of a gang of swindlers. But astrological savants are of opinion that if the 5th lord is favourably associated or aspected by favourable planets the person may he the master of a number of servants, he may become a judge or a magistrate or a minister empowered by the law of the land to punish wrong-doers and he shall be a Godfearing person.  He will have few children.

5th Lord is in the 2nd house: When the 5tb lord is favourably disposed the person will be blessed with a beautiful wife and bis children will behave themselves with him very respectfully. He will earn money from Government and will be a learned man and a good astrologer. If the 5th lord is afflicted and otherwise weak the person will be a poverty-stricken man, unable to maintain his family, and may suffer from domestic troubles, Parasari Hora says that he may be attacked with asthma or other kind of phlegmatic troubles.

5th Lord is in the 3rd house: When the 5th lord is favourably disposed the native may have many children and brothers, if the lord is unfavourable due to aspect of or association with malefics the native may be a deceitful person, will suffer from continuous occupational troubles and may have to lament over loss of children.

5th Lord is in the 4th house: If the 5th lord is favourably disposed the person may become a minister, adviser to the king or a preceptor. His mother will live long and be happy. If the lord is afflicted premature death of children is possible.

5th Lord is in the 5th house: If the lord is favourably disposed the pers0n will have a few children, he will prosper in his own vocational career and will be adored by men in power. He may be a great mathematician or head of a religious institution. If the lord is afflicted premature death of children is possible, he will be cruel, fickle-minded, sometimes harsh in his dealing with others.

5th Lord is in the 6th house: Lord being favourably disposed, benefit through maternal uncle who may be a man of repute, enmity with his sons. If the lord is afflicted he may adopt or purchase a son and then adopt.

5th Lord is in the 7th house: The result will be very favourable if the 5th lord is powerful and well-disposed in the 7th house. The native will be renowned, learned, prosperous, faithful to his master and a man of charming personality. One of his sons will live abroad and shall earn name, fame and wealth.   If the lord is afflicted there may be loss of children and one of his sons shall die after attaining name and fame.

5th Lord is in the 8th house:  Loss of paternal property due to debt, may suffer from lung or intestinal trouble, he will he peevish and unhappy,  His financial condition will not be bad.

5th Lord is in the 9th house: When the lord is favourahly disposed the person may be a preceptor or teacher, may renovate ancient temples, wells and gardens. One of his sons may be an author and will attain distinction and be as great as a king. If the lord is afflicted destruction of fortune is possible due to divine wrath.

5th Lord is in the 10th house:  When  the  5th  lord  is  favorable  the person acquires landes proprty, is held in high esteem by the King, perform religious deeds, one of his sons becomes a famous man and raises the status and prestige of the family. If the 5th lord is afflicted unfavourable results will happen.

5th Lord is in the 11th house : The lord if not afflicted, success in all undertakings, becomes a learned and efficient man, popular, blessed with sons, extends helping hand to others during their bad days, becomes an author, and rich; when the lord is afflicted the person becomes a man having shallow knowledge, earns money through hard labour and strenuous effort.

5th Lord is in the 12th house: The 12th home is a place of salvation. So if the 5th lord is favourable, unattached with or unaspectcd by any malefic and the 9th lord is favourably disposed the native attains salvation, atleast becomes great spiritually and  visits many holi shrines and lives in company of great Sadhus (ascetics). If the lord is afflicted there will be a show of austerity with no attainment of beneficial result, he may roam hither and thither sometimes aimlessly.

THE SIXTH HOUSE

The Sixth house rules enemy, accidents, disease, mental afflictions, mother's brother, stepmother, co-wife, litigation and misfortunes.

1. If the sixth house falls in an auspicious sign (rasi) and the bhava is associated with or aspected by benefic planet unfavourable results signified by the Sixth bhava should not be expected. Contrary results may happen when the Sixth  house falls  in an inauspicious sign conjoined with or aspected by an unfavourable planet.

2. If the three weak malefic planets are posited in the 6th or 8th place or these two bhavas are aspected by three weak malefics the native remains sickly since his birth and all along suffers due to monetary loss. He is mentally troubled owing to activities of enemies.    On the other hand if powerful Budha, vrhaspati, Sukra and favourable Chandra are situated in the 6th place the native's granary will be full of grain and cereals and the treasury also will never be empty.
2(i) If the 6th lord associates with or is aspected by a malefic and is situated in lagna the person will suffer from boils, if the 6th lord aspected by or conjoined  with malefic, is situated in the 5th house his son will suffer from boils, if such an afflicted 6th lord is posited in 4th the mother will suffer from boils etc.
2(ii) If Ravi associated with a friendly planet and benefic planet is placed in the 6th the native's enemies will be vanquished. If Ravi associated with a malefic and unfriendly planet is situated in the 6th house the person is always troubled by enemies.
2(iii) Weak and malefic Chandra in the 6th is the cause of suffering due to attack of varioµs diseases.
2(iv) The debilitated Mangal in the 6th  house causes danger to life and the native sustains monetary loss.
2(v) A retrograde vrhaspati being in the 6th place when posited in an enemy house gives the native awful troubles due to activities of an enemy or enemies.
2(vi) If the 6th lord being in the 6th is associated with Sani and Rahu the native also suffers much due to activities of enemies.
2(vii) If the weak 6th lord is situated in a dusthana ( 6th, 8th or 12th place ) and the lord of lagna is powerful and welldisposed the native can surmount all the obstacles and subdues his enemies.
2(viii) There is danger from fire or  chance of loss of money due to activities of thieves if the 6th lord is combined with Sani and Mangal.

3. If afflicted Ravi is placed in the 6th house the person suffers from headache, any disease due to poison, heart trouble, gastritis or any other disease due to defective secretion of biles.

4. Afflicted Chandra in the 6th indicates Balaristha (serious illness) during early childhood. The native may be attacked with periodic fever, asthma, lung disease, hydrocele etc.

5. Afflicted Mangal in the 6th makes the native suffer from Haematemesis ( disease involving spontaneous haemorrhage), cholera, pox, measles, ulcer, piles, fistula, blood dysentery, accident, wound by any weapon etc. The native may experience loss of money and troubles through employees. If the afflicting planet is Sani there is chance of death due to operation or injury by animals. If Rahu afflicts Mangal death may be due to suicide, if it is Ketu the native may die by poisoning.

6. If Budha is afflicted and an indicator of disease is situated in the 6th place the native may suffer from indigestion, hysteria, loss of memory.

7. If vrhaspati is an indicator of disease and being afflicted is posited in the 6th bhava the person may suffer from asthma, typhoid, dyspepsia, liver trouble, diarrhoea, apoplexy, pthysis.

8. If afflicted Sukra positioned in the 6th place in the birth chart of a woman she suffers from leucorrhoea, disease of ovary or uterus, syphilis etc. In case of a male the native may be attacked with syphilis, dropsy, inflammation of prostate gland, diabetes, impotency, eye trouble.

9. Afflicted Sani in the 6th place causes Paralysis, nervous ailments, hysteria, enlargement of spleen, lunacy and asthma.

10. Afflicted Rahu or Ketu causes flatulence, toothache, diarrhoea, worms, morbid condition of nerves. The lord of the sign where Rahu or Ketu is posited will also indicate the disease.

11. Special Yogas concerning disease :
11(a) If the 6th house and its lord are afflicted by an unfavourable planet or by association with Sani and Rahu, and both these planets are situated in the 6th place the native remains sickly throughout his life.
11(b) If 6th lord is in the 8th place and 6th place is occupied by Mangal the person is attacked with high fever at the age of 12 years.
11(c) If Chandra and vrhaspati are in the 6th bhava the native is attacked with any kind of disease in the womb or belly at the age of 19 or 22 years.
11(d) Rahu in the 6th, Lagna lord in the 8th and Gulik in any Kendra, possibility of attack of pthysis.
11(e) The 2nd lord in the 6th and the 6th lord in the 12th, possibility of enlargement of spleen at the age 8 or 29 years.
11(f) If 6th bhava is occupied by Chandra combined with Sani the native may be attacked with leprosy at the age of 55 years.
11(g) Lagnapathi in lagna and Sani in the 6th, chance of attack with rheumatism or gout.

It would be wrong if our readers gather this impression that in all cases planets occupying the 6th house which is termed as dusthana or inauspicious house will give unfavourable results. But in practice this is not all true. The following rules will testify our statement :

12(a) Ravi in the 6th house : The native becomes a good and famous politician, and successful in his endeavours. The result will be otherwise if Ravi is afflicted.
12(b) Chandra: When favourable and strong in the 6th bhava the native shows his efficiency and attains success in his vocational career.
12(c) Mangal when favourable and strong in the 6th bhava, the native may be highly sensual, an able administrator or politician.
12(d) Budha favourable and strong in the 6th bhava, a man of sharp intellect outwardly a good man but quarrelsome, yet he is respected by many, his educational career is not smooth-sailing. 
12(e) vrhaspati does not give any good result in the 6th house.
12(f)  If Sukra unaffiicted be in the 6th bhava the native has no enemy, he is benefited by women but may be corrupted by young women.
12(g) Sani in the 6th house makes a man qurrelsome but courageous and the native can undertake very hard task and complete it to his satisfaction.
12(h) Rahu in the 6th bhava makes a person long-lived, wealthy but he may be troubled by enemies.
12(i) Ketu in the 6th bhava gives very best result, the native may earn name and fame and may have no enemy.

This is also to be remembered that astrologers must be cautious in applying  the above rules without  taking  into considerations of aspect, conjuncticn and other important factors that may modify the good effect cf planets in the 6th house. To explain further, let us take an example -- Chandra when strong and favourable dos good to the native but if she is afflicted by the aspect of any unfavourable planet Chandra may be be cause of hysteria, mental derangement (may be lunacy) etc.

When the planets in the 6th house are afflicted the native may suffer from many ailments. Nature of diseases are suggested here below :
{i) If 6th place falls in a fixed sign ( Rasi) with afflicted Ravi heart trouble, asthma, nerve isease etc. may be anticipated but aspect of favourable vrhaspati on Ravi may neutralise all these bad effects. If Ravi be in a movable rasi and is afflicted disease of indigestion is possible, here also aspect of favourable and strong vrhaspati will do him good.
(ii) When Chandra in the 6th house is afflicted by Rahu or Ketu indigestion, skin disease, loss of mental peace may be possible ; if she is afflicted by Sani various sorts of chronic diseases, mental derangement, and when she is afflicted by Ravi bad liver and complaint of indigestion are possible.
(iii) When Mangal in the 6th is afflicted by Rahu or Kctu the native suffers from despondency and always thinks of suicide or death by poisoning ; when afflicted by Sani the native is inclined to pick up quarrel with any body and every body and may be  involved into litigation with brothers.  The native may be short-tempered and haughty.
(iv)  When Budha is afflicted by Rahu,	Ketu or  Sani  the native suffers from despondency, abnormal mental condition and may be easily excitable.
(v)  vrhaspati in the 6th house when afflicted makes the native a voracious eater of sweets and meat and in the long run suffers from serious trouble of indigestion. vrhaspati under that circumstance causes great hardship too.
(vi)  Sukra when afflicted is the cause of urinary trouble, disease of sexual organ, etc. and the native may be addicted to wine and women.
(vii)  Afflicted Sani in the 6th causes serious illness, incurable diseases, gout, paralysis etc.



Occupation of 6th lord in differeut hhavas and results thereof 

6th lord in the 1st house:  Maharsi  Parasar says, the native will be a famous man, rich, highly qualified, efficient, and  courageous but he shall have no son if the 6th lord is in the 1st house. Other astrologers are of opinion that when well-aspected the 6th lord in the 1st house may make the native a high administrative officer, a minister of war or an official concerned with prisons. But there is an exception in case of Tula Lagna-Jataka.  If the lagna is in Tula and the 6th lord vrhaspati is with lagna the native never keeps good health and suffers set back in almos1 all  his endeavours. Maharshi Parasar rightly said that "Tufa lagna Gurus Khalas" i.e. in case of Tula lagna  vrhaspati is very nnfavourable.
Unfavourable ( i.e. weak and otherwise afflicted) 6th  lord in the 1st house is not a favourable yoga for a native, one should not welcome the weak and otherwise afflicted 6th lord in the 1st house.  For, it makes a man a thief, robber or a leader of a criminal gang.

6th lord in the 2nd house: If the 6th lord is posited in the 2nd house the native shall be courageous, single minded devotion to his duties, an orator and happy. But the native may have untold suffering in family life, will be disowned by his kith and kin and shall have to live in a foreign land. If afflicted he will have defective vision, uneven setting of teeth and may be a stammerer and poverty stricken. His wife may fall seriously ill during the dasa and bhukti of malefic planets.

6th lord in the 3rd house: The native may be a man of violent temper, cruel, malicious, intolerant, and rich.  He will  be inimical to his brothers and incur loss of money due to inimical activities of his maternal uncle.

6th lord in the 4th house: There may be obstacles in academic career, relation with mother may not be as congenial as it should be.  If the 6th lord is afflicted he shall quarrel with his mother and ancestral property may be involved in debt. He will not enjoy peace in family life.  If the 6th lord is strong and 4th lord also is favourably disposed the native may enjoy happiness and be prosperous during dasa and bhukti of benefic planets.

6th lord in the 5th house: Uncertainty in money-making activities, at times he shall suffer from poverty. That is also the case in respect of his friends. His children will be sickly, may be adopted by his maternal uncles and be fortunate.

6th lord in the 6th house : When the 6th lord occupies the 6th place the native shall be rich and shall have his own cars and other vehicles. His own kith and kin shall be hostile to him but he will be popular among others. If the weak lord of lagna is conjoined with the 6th lord the native will suffer from incurable disease.

6th lord in the 7th house:  The native will be financially aflluent and shall earn name and fame if the 6th lord is fortified in the 7th house. If the lord is afflicted the wife of the native may be a woman of suspicious character, his relation with her may be unfavourable.  There is another opinion held by other classes of astrologers who say that the wife will be sickly and the native's conjugal life will not be happy. If the 7th place falls in signs owned by Sani or Budha the native may be sexually weak.

6th lord in the 8th house: Indication of Madhyayu ( Middle life). Success in life after many obstacles or through great hardship. If 6th lord is afflicted the native will be a women hunter and be heavily in debt. He shall frequently suffer from illness and will have strained relation with learned men. He will find pleasure in causing distress to others.

6th lord in the 9th house : The maternal uncle of the native will be a fortunate man and the father will be a judge. Strained relation with the father is possible. He may be benefited by his cousins, may be a timber merchant or stone cutter.  If the 6th lord is weak and afllicted the native may indulge in sinful acts and becomes poor.

6th lord in the 10th house :  Outwardly a pious man but unscrupulous in regard to religious matters. When favoured by a benefic he shall be courageous, dutiful and happy.  If 6th lord is afflicted he is to fight a very powerful enemy and leads a low life.

6th lord in the 11th house : The native may be highly qualified and efficient, if the 6th is weak and afflicted the native may lead a miserable life due to poverty.

6th lord in the 12th house:  The native causes harm to others, always tries to antagonize learned men, if afflicted the native passes his days miserably.


CHAPTER -VII
JAYA BHAVA - The seventh house

The seventh house denotes marriage, wife or husband, trade or business, buying and selling, partnership, short journey, sexual act, bladder, lost property etc. If the 7th bhava and its lord is associated with or aspected by a benefic planet the wife or the husband as the case may be will be beautiful to look at, their physical structure may be charming and the native"s relation with his ( or her) father-in-law may be cordial and domestic environment may be peaceful.  All the rules of judging a horoscope are applicable also in case of this bhava. In case of a male Sukra, and in case of a female native both Sukra and Mangal signify the 7th bhava i.e. husband or wife. Therefore in judging the 7th bhava dispositon of Sukra ( in case of a male) or Sukra and Mangal (in case of a female) and the 7th house from these planets and their lords are to be taken into consideration. If they are well-disposed, acquires favourable
Vargas or conjoined with or aspected by benefic planets tho native's conjugal life will be happy.

1. Number of wives :

Now-a-days law of the land forbids a person to have more than one wife at a time. Of course a widower can marry again when his first or second wife dies. Law has nothing to do in respect of those who married again and again during the life time of their first wife before the enactment of this law. So, when a birth chart shows signs of more than one wife the verdict of the astrologer must be given after careful consideration. If the native is not a man of good character, rather he is a man of loose morals and at the same time there are signs of more than one marriage at a time the native may have one legally married wife and has other women as concubines. Therefore number of wives may be judged from that perspective.
The number of Navamsa the 7th lord traversed or the number of planets  aspecting  the  7th  bhava  or  number  of  planets conjoined with the 7th lord may be the number of wives of the native. This sort of planetary aspect or conjunction may be commonly found in any birth chart. But that should not be the criterion in giving one's judgment. If the native is morally strong astrologer's verdict about number of wives must be otherwise. But there is no legal bar to marry again and again in case of death of 1st and 2nd wife etc.

Two wives:
(a) If the lagnadhipathi ( lord of lagna) is posited in the 7th or 8th place and the lord of 2nd place is associated with malefic.
(b)  Or lagnadhipathi and the lord of the 7th are posited in lagna or 7th house,
(c) Or lagna or the 7th house is occupied by lagnadhipathi or the 7th lord occupies lagna.
{d)  If  the lord of lagna is in the 8th and a malefic is in the 7th place or the 2nd lord is in the 8th and a malefic in the 7th.
(e) If the 7th lord from the 7th house is joined with a benefic and is posited in the 6th or in his house of debilitation or the 7th house is occupied by a malefic.
(f) The natural significator of marriage, viz., Sukra when conjoined with a malefic or posited in his debilitated house in Navamsa chart-these yogas indicate two wives.

One wife and one son :
If Ravi, Chandra and the lord of lagna or the 7th lord are posited in lagna or the 7th house the person has one wife and one son.

Three wives :
(a) If the 2nd or the 7th house is occupied by number of malefic planets and the 7th lord is aspected by a malefic.
(b) If the lagna, the 2nd or the 7th house is associated with a malefic planet and the lord of the 7th house is combust or posited in his house of debilitation the native may have three
wives.

More than two wives :
The following configuration of planets signify many wives (at least more than two wives):
(a) When the 7th lord occupying the house of eitber Sani or Sukra. is aspected by a benefic planet, ( the yoga will be very forceful if the 7th lord is exalted or in his own house).
(b) Powerful Budha when occupies the 10th place from Lagna and Chandra is in the 3rd place from the 7th lord.
(c) When the lords of the 2nd and 12th houses together are posited in the 3rd place from lagna and aspected by either vrhaspati or the lord of the 9th house.
(d) When the 7th lord occupying his own, friendly or exalted house is situated in any Kendra or Kona and combined with the lord of the 10th house.
(e) If the lords of the 7th and 11th houses are combined or exchange each other's house and are placed in any Kona i.e. 5th or 9th house.
(f)  When the lord of the 9th house is in the 7th and 7th lord is in the 4th house.
(g) The lords of the 7th and 11th houses are placed in any Kendra.

The aforesaid yogas conferring more than two wives become fruitful.

2. Conduct of the wife :
The native's wife may be a woman of bad conduct-
(a) If the 7th lord, the 7th house or the Navamsa lord of the Saptampathi ( lord of the 7th house ) is in conjunction with a malefic planet. Or
(b)  the 7th lord and the natural indicator of the 7th house ( generally Sukra is a natural indicator of the 7th house)is in his  house of debilitation either in the birth or Navamsa Chart and remains unaspected by any benefic.
(c) If Ravi or the lord of the 7th house is in conjunction  with or aspected by a malefic or those two planets (Ravi and the 7th lord - at least either of them) are placed in any unfavourable house in the Navamsa chart the native's wife indulges in sinful acts.
(d) The wife of the native may be a woman of loose morals and rough-tongued if the 7th lord is weak and the 6th house is occupied by a debilitated or combust planet.
(e) When the lord of the 7th house together with Budha is combust or placed in the house of debilitation or the planet is in 6th or 8th place and conjoined with malefic planets and also is hemmed in between malefics the wife of the native brings disrepute to her family and brings about the death of her husband through her malicious activities.

3. A good, honest, religious minded and faithful wife :
(a) The lord of the 7th house conjoined with a favourable planet, aspected by a benefic or is placed between beneficial planets.
(b) If the lord of the 7th house is in a favourable Navamsa, and the 10th lord is strong.
(c) Similarly if the Karaka planet Sukra is posited in a favourable Navamsa and also the 10th lord is strong.
(d) If the 7th  lord occupies his own exalted or friendly house
(e) If the lord of the 7th house acquire Gopur nrga and is posited in Makara rasi.( A planet is said  to be in  Gopur varga when he acquires 4 vargas of his own ).
(f) Even if the 7th lord is a natural papa ( malefic) but is positioned in  friendly house or in his house of exaltation in the birth or navamsa chart and at the same time he is conjoined with or aspected by a benefic the wife is faithful to her husband.
(g) Similarly if the 7th lord Sani is powerfully posited in the birth chart and is in conjunction with or aspected by vrhaspati the wife of the native is benevolent, respectful to gods and brahmins. She will bo a person of good conduct and believes in the doctrine of Vedanta philosophy.
(h) If the 7th place from the  position  of  the  7th lord is occupied by the lord of the 2nd or the lords of lagna and the 7th house are equal in strength the family status of both the husband and the wife is of the same rank and the wife of the native is faithful and respectful to him (the native) and she will be a goodnatured person.

4. A religions minded wife practising penance :
(a) If the powerful lord of the 7th house, or the karaka planet in strength is associated with or aspected by vrhaspati the wife of the native observes religious rites and practises penance.
(b)  If the 7th lord is in a favourable  rasi or in a beneficial navamsa and also aspected by a favourable planet the wife of the native observes religious rites very carefully.
(c) If Chandra is posited in any auspicious house or in a favourable navamsa, or occupies the house of exaltation the wife of the native is honest and good-natured.
(d) The similar result is expected if the 7th lord and also the karaka planet are placed in a favourable rasi.

5. A bad, cruel, ill-behaved or haughty wife :
(a) If the 7th place from lagna, the lord thereof or Navamsa lord of either the 7th place or its lord is associated with or aspected by a malefic the wife of the native may be dishonest or ill-behaved. Similarly if the lord of the 7th house and the karaka of the 7th bhava are posited in their debilitated houses either in birth or Navamsa chart and they remain unaspected by a benefic planet the result as said above is to be predicted.
(b) If Ravi or the lord of the 7th house is in a malefic Navamsa, or conjoined with or aspected by a malefic planet the wife of the native may be dishonest.
(c) If the lord of the 7th house or Chandra is afflicted due to association with or aspected by an unfavourable planet or any of them is hemmed in between malefic planets or both the planets are in unfavourable Navamsas the wife of the native indulges in baneful acts and will be accused of heinous offence.
(d) If the 7th lord is weak and the 6th place from lagna is occupied by a debilitated or combust planet the wife of the native is wicked and rude, and she may have illicit relation with some person.
(e) If the 7th lord joins Budha who is in his debilitated house, combust, or associated with a malefic or posited in the 6th or 8th place from lagna and is also situated between malefic planets the wife of the native may kill her husband and will ruin the family prestige.
(f) If the 7th lord occupies the house of debilitation or be in the 6th place from lagna and is aspected by an unfavourable planet, and posited in a movable papa Navamsa rasi the wife of the native brings disgrace on the family.

The unfavourable results stated above ruay be modified to a great extent if the 7th house and its lord are aspected by benefics or they are situated in a favourable Navamsa and are not in cruel Sasthyamsa.

6. Possibility of early marriage :
(a) In case of a male, if Chandra is situated within the 3rd house from lagna or within the 9th house from the 7th place. ( Chandra of brighter half will be more sure in giving effect to this yoga).
(b) In case of a woman, Ravi instead of Chandra will give the same result if he (Ravi) is posited in those places.
(c) If Sukra or planets, more than one at least are posited in watery sign.
(d) If a powerful Chandra occupies the 5th or the 7th place from lagna.
(e) Eminent astrologers of India believe that if the lords of the 7th and lagna are posited near to each other or the karaka planet is situated next to lagnapathi or vice-versa, or a favourable planet is posited near the lord of lagna or the 7th lord early marriage is possible.
Here are two illustrations of early marriage :
(i) Lagna is in Simha rasi, Ravi the lord of lagna is in Tula and the karaka planet is in Vrscika rasi. The native was married at the age of 23.
(ii) Lagna is in Dhanu rasi. The lord of the 7th house is in Kumbha rasi, the karaka planet Sukra is in Mina and the lord of lagna is in Mesa rasi. The native was married at the age of 21. 
In both the cases the lagnapathi and the karaka planet are situated very near to each other.

7. The Yoga that makes a  person bachelor or  spinster ( Anurha Yoga ) :
(a) If any	one of three planets, viz., Sukra, Ravi and Chandra ( particularly Chandra ) is aspected by or conjoined with Sani or any one of these trio is associated with Sani's. Nakshatra ( i.e. Nakshatra No. 8, 17 & 26) there is possibility of no marriage at all. The yoga may be more effective if the aforesaid conditions are fulfilled in Navamsa chart also.
(b) When Ravi, Chandra and also the lord of the 5th house are in conjunction with or aspected by Sani the same result may be foretold. According to western school of astrologers the yoga as said above will also be effective if these planets are associated with or aspected by Herschel ( Uranus ).
(c) If Sukra is placed in a birthchart at a distance of 43 degree or more from debilitated Ravi and is aspected by or conjoined with Sani the negotiation of marriage may fall thrnugh just at the time of completion of negotiation. According to western astrologers the yoga will yield the above result more accurately  if Sukra under  that  circumstance  is afflicted by Pluto.
(d) If the 7th place remains unoccupied by any planet and Chaudra in case of a woman, and Ravi in case of a man, are aspected by Sani occupying Vrscika rasi the marriage of a person is an uncertainty.    Western astrologers are of opinion that when Sani is in Square aspect with Ravi or Chandra the same result may be expected.
(e) If the 7th lord, lagna and Sukra fall in an unfertile rasi there is least possibility of marriage. ( Unfertile rasis are mithuna, Simha, Kanya and Dhanu ).
These yogas ( i.e. Configuration of planets) may not be found in toto in all cases, but if most of the conditions set forth above are there in a radical chart the aforesaid result may be expected.

8. Late Marriage :
(a) In case of a man if the 4th or 10th place is occupied by Chandra, in case of a woman if Ravi occupies the 4th or 10th place marriage may certainly be delayed if the native is born in Krishna Paksha ( i.e. during dark moon ).
(b) If Mesa rasi is occupied by Sukra or by more than two planets, Or
(c) Lagna or Chandra falls in an unfertile sign the judgment of late marriage may be pronounced.
In these cases both the birth and Navamsa charts should be consulted.
(d) Our experience in matter of late marriage is as follows:
(d1) Of the 2nd, Sth, 7th, 8th or 12th house from lagna if any two or three houses are occupied by Sani, Maogal, Ravi, Rahu - particularly by Sani and Rahu, Mangal and Rahu or Ravi and Sani there is strong possibility of late marriage.
{d2)  It becomes a matter of headache for parent regarding marriage of their children if those houses mentioned above (from Sukra and Chandra ) are associated with malefic planets.
Illustrations oflate marriage :
(i) Lagna is in Kanya, in the 2nd place Rahu, in the 3rd place Ravi and Budha, in the 4th place Sukra, the 7th house ia occupied by vrhaspati, the 8th place by Sani and Ketu and Chandra is in mithuna ( 10th place from lagna )
(ii) Lagna is in Vrscika rasi, occupied by Ravi, Budha in the 2nd, Chandra in the 3rd, vrhaspati in the 4th. Sani in the 5th, Ketu in the 6th, Mangal in the 11th and the 12th house is occupied by Sukra and Rahu.
In the first instance lagna and Chandra are in unfertile rasis, again Chandra in the 10th place from Lagna, Sani in the 8th, Rahu in the 2nd and Sani aspects Chandra.
In the second instance Sani is in the 5th, Rahu in the 12th and the 2nd house is aspected by Mangal and Sani.

Inspite of these yogas marriage is possible under the following circumstances :
(a) If lagna is occupied by Sukra and the lord of the 11th house.
(b) If powerful vrhaspati is posited in the 5th place from lagna, the 7th house from powerful Chandra is occupied by Sukra and the 7th house from lagna is not occupied by any malefic planet.
(c) If vrhaspati being in the 5th or 9th house from lagna aspects lagna, Chandra is beneficial due to aspect of or conjunction with favourable planets and is not situated between malefic, or is not afflicted due to aspect or conjunction with any unfavourable planet.
(d) If the 7th lord is powerful and favourably situated and at the same time he is aspected by or conjoined with favourable planets.

Some astrologers make vrhaspati in the 7th house responsible for delay in marriage and experience has in many cases borne this out. But nevertheless, the responsibility of vrhaspati  in these cases remains doubtful. Many competent astro1ogen think vrhaspati in the 7th house makes a successful marriage. Jataka Parijat declares quite uuequivocably that Vrhaapathi in the 11th house givea the native a bride desirable in every respect.


Under the above circumstances the  yoga conferring 'no marriage' may be considered as cancelled.

In respect of cancellation of 'Anurha Yoga' ( Yoga of no marriage) in the birth chart the Navamsa chakra also should be examined, If the 'Anurha Yoga' is thus found as cancelled in the rasi or Navamsa chakra the marriage may be held during the dasa antardasa of favourable planets.

If vrhaspati in transit moves to 5th, 7th or 9th place from lagna, Chandra or Sukra - particularly Chandra, marriage of the native is possible during favourable dasa and antardasa.
Before we enter into elaborate discussions about timing of the most important event like marriage we must admit that among various astrological problems that confront an astrologer the timing of marriage is the most difficult one that cannot be predicted with utmost certainty. The astrologer is really bewildered not knowing which rule among various ones may be suitably applicable in a particular case as in authoritative books there are so many to determine the period of marriage.    Generally astrologers are of opinion that marriage occurs when transiting vrhaspati traverses the 1st, 2nd, 5th, 7th, 9th or 11th place from lagna or Chandra.
--------------------------------------------------------
Marriage timing section deleted 

page 169 -- 172
--------------------------------------------------------

9. Yogas of immorality, loose morals or bad character :
We have already stated that the 7th house indicates marriage. sexual life and happiness. The house also indicates latent energies and general happiness in the family etc.   As the house represents sex and sex-life one's moral character may also be judged from this house. We suggest herebelow aome of the yogas that make a native licentious, and immoral and some of the favourable yogas may be there to give perfect happiness in married life.
(a) If the lords of the 2nd and 6th are afflicted due to conjunction with or aspect by a malefic and occupy the 6th place from Lagna the native may be a person of loose morals.
(b) The 7th lord occupying the lagna makes a man passionate and if that 7th lord is afflicted the native may be a man of loose morals.
(c) Sukra in the 7th house makes a person extremely passionate but Sukra and Budha together in the 7th house make him hunt after other's wife.
(d) When in a birthchart 7th house is occupied by Sukra, Budha and Mangal the native is a man of perverted sex and is guilty of homo-sexuality.
(e) If Rahu or Ketu is conjoined with the lord of the 7th house and is aspected by Mangal or Sani and also Sukra is afflicted due to unfavourable position or aspect the native is notoriously immoral during the early period of his life.
(f) So also, if Sukra in combination with lords of the 2nd, 6th and 7th occupies lagna the native will be a person of loose morals.
The author of Sarvarthachintamoni is of opinion :
(g) if the 7th place is occupied  by Mangal the native is a debauch and enjoys many women, and
(g1) if Ravi is posited in the 7th place the native indulges  in sexual act with woman or women related to him.
The author further says that
(g2) the native's moral character will  be loose if Rahu or Ketu combines with the 7th lord and is aspected by a malefic.

10. Yogas that make a person moral-minded and chaste in sexual llfe :
(a) vrhaspati when posited	in the 7th house with	no malefic aspect makes the native strictly moral.
(b) The lord of lagna, or Chandra if situated in a fovourable rasi and  Navamsa,  occupies a Kendra and is aspected  by a benefic the native shall be a person of moral stamina nnd possesses high standard of personality.
(c) When the 7th lord is in combination with or is aspected by vrhaspati or the planet denoting the 7th bhava is aspected by or in conjunction with vrhaspati the native possesses a good moral character and his wife too is a pious person.

There are persons who are not strictly speaking moral-minded but they lead faultless sex-lives. The lords of the 9th and the lagnapathi are primary factors in this matter. Even the afflicted 7th house and its lord and Sukra may not make the native unchaste in sex-matters if the 6th place, its lord, lagna, lagnadhipathi and Chandra are placed in favourable rasis and Navamsas and aspected by or conjoined with favourable planet. The beneficial result in this respect may be more certain if those planets endowed with merits are placed in Kendra position from lagna.

11. Good and honest wife or husband may be expected from the following Yogas :
(a)	The 7th lord when well-disposed, aspected by favourable planets or placed between benefics.
(b) When the 7th lord is in favourable Navamsa and 10th lord is powerful and favourably disposed.
(c) Similarly when Sukra as the natural indicator of the 7th bhava is in favourable Navamsa and the 10th lord is strong.
(d) If the 7th lord is exalted, placed in his own or friendly house.
(e) When the lord of the 7th house is strong and is conjoined with or aspected by vrhaspati the wife or the husband is pious and strictly observes religious rites.
(f) If the 7th lord or Ravi is placed in makara Rasi (Capricorn) and is aspected by favourable planets and the 7th place is occupied by vrhaspati the wife or the husband is religious minded and very much faithful to life-partner.
(g) If Chandra is posited in a favourable rasi, Navamsa or is exalted the wife or the husband of the native is faithful to her or his life-partner and the native possesses good moral character.
(h) If the 7th lord or Karaka planet Sukra is well-disposed and powerful the same result is expected.
(i)  If the 7th lord Sani is strong, well-disposed and is aspected by or combined with vrhaspati or with any other benefic planet the native becomes respectful to brahmins and gods and  tries to know Brahma. But if that Sani is in conjunction with Rahu or Ketu and is aspected by any other malefic and is also posited in 'Krura' (very malefic) Shastyamsa  the  native earns  bad  names and is-quarrelsome, rude and rough.

Other unfavourable Yogas regarding the 7th bhava 
12. Premature death of wife or husband :
(a) If the 7th place is occupied by Rahu, 8th place by Sani and the 6th place  is occupied by Mangal, or Ravi is posited in the 10th place and Chandra in the 6th,  premature death  of life.partner is possible.
(b) If the 7th place from lagna or Chandra is associated with a malefic planet the aforesaid result is expected.
(c) Premature death of the husband or wife ( as the  case may be) is certain if Mangal in the 7th place is aspected by Sani. Only Mangal in the 7th place from lagnil may give the same unfavourable result.

13. Widowhood:
Mangal in lagna, 4th, 7th, 8th or 12th house may bring about death of the husband ( or the wife ) of the native. This is astrologically termed as Bhaum dosha. There are some renowned astrologers who are of opinion that Mangal in the 2nd place from lagna gives the same result.  But this also is to be remembered that if Mangal inspite of his position in any of those unfavourable places acquires strength in Vargas or by aspect of powerful benefics "bhaum dosba" may be neutralised.

The  following  yogas  also  indicate premature  death of life partner, such as:-
(a) When 8th lord is in an unfavourable Navamsa, the 7th house is occupied by a malefic and there is no benefic in the second house.
(b) If a malefic planet is associated with the 81h house and  the  lord of the  8th house is posited in his own Navamsa.


14. The following configuration of planets nullify the yogas of widowhood.
(a) If the 8th lord is seated in the house of exaltation.
(b) If the Navamsa lord of the ruler of the 8th	house is, posited in a malefic house and is also aspected by a malefic premature death of the husband or the wife of the native is no doubt indicated but if the 8th house in the natal chart is occupied and aspected by benefics the "bbaum dosha" is nullified.
(c) If birthcharts of both husband and wife contain similar malefic yogas the 'bhaum dosha• is neutralised.
(d) If the 7th house is occupied by Sani and Mangal is posited in the 8th or Mangal and Sani are situated in the 4th place or if Sani is in lagna and Mangal is in the 12th place 'bhaum dosha' is neutralised.
(e) 'Bhaum dosha' caused by Mangal being in any of the places such as 4th, 7th, 8th or 12th may be nullified if any one of those houses are occupied by Sani or Rahu.


15. Determination of wife's ( or husband's ) Family Standard or Pedcgree :
 The complexion, caste, propriety of conduct, social rank, qualities etc. of husband or wife may be indicated by the 7th house and its lord. As for instance, say, a person's lagna falls. in Mina rasi, the lord thereof is vrhaspati who is a brahmin by caste. The 7th house from Mina rasi is Kanya, the lord is Budha who is Vaisya by caste. That is, the 7th lord belongs to a lower caste than brahmin. So, Budha will indicate the caste, complexion, merits etc. of the life-partner of the native. Sources of these qualities, merits or demerits are to be found from the position, strength and aspect over Budha. Generally complexion, gracefulness, countenance, physical structure of the wife or the husband of the native are to be judged from the 7th lord and the Navamsa lord or the Saptamadhipathi ( lord of the 7th house), This also is to be noted that aspect on or conjunction with the 7th lord by any other planet  may definitely influence the finding of the astrologer.
(a) If the lagnapathi is weak and 6th house of the birthchart is the Navamsa rasi of the 7th lord, he ( 7th lord ) is debilitated, combust or conjoined with a debilitated planet the bride of the native comes of a family of a comparatively lower standard.
(b) Similarly if the lord of lagna is weaker than the 7!h lord and he ( lagnapathi ) is debilitated, conjoined with malefics or posited in the 8th house the husband's family standard or pedegree is lower than the wife's.

16. Love marriage, Civil marriage and Intercaste marriage etc ;
Love marriage, civil marriage or marriage with persons of different or prohibited caste may be judged from the 5th lord, Sukra and the lord of the 7th. Combination of Sani and Sukra, Sukra and Ravi or Mangal has a great role in this respect. But it is an admitted fact that love marriage comes within jurisdiction of the 5th house and its lord. Regarding intercaste marriage Maharshi Parasar says in his Vrihat Parasari Hora, 'when the waning moon occupies the 5th place, and the 7th and 12th houses are associated with malefic planets, the marriage with a person belonging to a iower or prohibited caste may occur.'

17. Conjugal life :
The 7th places from lagna and Chandra and their lords and Karaka planet Sukra in case of a man, and Sukra and Mangal in case of a woman indicate the nature of conjugal life of the native.
(a) If the 7th place is occupied by a malefic planet and if that planet is inimical to the 7th lord and the lord of lagna the conjugal life of the native is not expected to be happy and peaceful.
(b)  If Karaka planets{ viz., Sukra and Mangal ) are  in any way afflicted there is remote chance for the native to enjoy peaceful conjugal life.
(c) If the 7th bhava is occupied by its lord, receives aspect of a benevolent planet and also lord of the 7th bhava from either lagna or Chandra is favourably disposed the conjugal life of the native is expected to be happy.

In short we may summarize the aforesaid rules in	the following manner :
Any given house is always 7th in relation to wife's vis-a-vis which is in exact confrontation to it.The husband's and wife's natal houses are thus inter.related and have to be judged in conjunction with each other. The status, family, health, wealth, education etc. of the husband and the wife are mirrored in the first and the seventh. If any of them is governed or aspected by an evil planet the disparities and afflictions should follow. Favourably governed and favourably aspected the results would be happy.

Occupation of planets in the 7th bhava and results thereof:
(a) Ravi in the 7th house :  If the 7th house is occupied by Ravi the wife of the native may be barren, he will wander hither and thither aimlessly and may suffer humiliation. According to Parasari Hora conjugal life of the native will remain disturbed if Ravi occupies the 7th house.
(b) Chandra In the 7th house : If the waning moon is in the 7th house the wife of the native will be unfaithful but if that moon is aspected by a powerful beoefic the wife of the native will be virtuous and faithful to the husband. If the full or waxing moon is posted in the 7th bhava and a benefic planet casts his aspect on Chandra the native will be beautiful to look at, will be loved by beautiful damsels and will be exceedingly lovely. According to Parasari Hora waxing or full moon in the 7th house makes a man happy, learned and wealthy.
(c) Mangal In the 7th house : When Mangal occupies the 7th bhava the wife in case of a male and the husband in cas of a female dies premature death. Maharshi Parasar says that the native shall serve low class people and his wife will not live long.
(d) Budha in the 7th House : When strong Budha is situated in the 7th house the native will be learned, wiil always like good and beautiful dress, his wife will be artistic, fortunate and rich. Weak Budha when afflicted will be the cause of unhappy conjugal life.
(e)Vrbaspatbl in the 7th house : vrhaspati occuping the 7th house will make the native happy, wise and benevolent. The native will have a beautiful lucky, faithful and virtuous wife. His children also will be highly educated and lucky. If debilitated vrhaspati be in the 7th house the native will lose his wife. If Sani is posited in the 7th bhava identical with Mina rasi the result will be the same. If vrhaspati occupies a rasi or Navamsa owned by Sani or Mangal the Native may have illicit relation with other women. But Mantreswar in his Phaldipika holds a different view, he is of opinion that it is Sukra ( not vrhaspati) who will give the malefic result as stated above. If the planet occupying 7th house is in a Varga of Mangal or Sani the native may have a liason with other people's wife.
(f)Sukra in the 7th house : If the 7th house is occupied by strong Sukra the wife of the native will enjoy happy conjugal life and she will be highly prosperous. But afflicted Sukra in the 7th house makes a man licentious and unhappy,
(g) Sani in the 7th house : Conjugal life of the native will not be peaceful if Sani is in th 7th house, but when Sani in the 7th house occupies his exalted, own or mooltrikona sign the conjugal life will be happy. An afflicted Sani or Sani in conjunction with or aspected by a malefic planet or if posited in an inimical house identical with 7th bhava will give the native immense trouble in his domestic environment, his wife may be quarrelsome, peevish and he himself will be roaming aimlessly and distressed,
(h) Rauu in the 7th house : If Rahu occupies the 7th house the person concerned will lose his wealth through intrigues with women, suffer separation from his near and dear ones, he may be obstinate and silly.
(i)Ketu in the 7th house : If Ketu is posited in the 7th house the native will be humiliated, seek the company of women of bad repute, will suffer from disease of intestine, his wife will be sickly, and he will lose his vital power.


Occupation of the 7th lord in different bhavas and results thereof :
(a) 7th lord is in the 1st house - If the 7th lord occupies lagna the native may have intrigues with women other than his wife, he may be a man of loose morals, he will have sharp intellect, will be prudent and skilful and may suffer from rheumatism or gout ; particularly if lagna rises in Vrscika rasi and the 7th lord is in lagna the native may be a man of loose morals. If Mangal or Rahu is in the 7th house and Sukra in Vrscika rasi where lagna is situated the native may be a debauch. Similar result may be predicted when lagna falls in Tula rasi and Sukra in conjunction with Sam, Mangal or Rahu occupies the 7th house.
(b) 7th lord is in the 2nd house - The  native has procrastinating  habit, and is financially affluent. The native may be a henpecked husband. If the seventh lord is Sukra favourable result noted above will be very effective. This may be the case in case of Mesa and Vrscika lagna. In other lagnas monetary affluence will be mediocre. In Mesa lagna Sukra in combination with vrhaspati and Mangal, occupying the 2nd house is a "Yogakaraka" planet and the native becomes a very rich man.
(c) 7th lord is inthe 3rd house - If the fifth house and its lord and karaka planet vrhaspati are not favourable and the 7th lord occupies the 3rd house the native's children may be shortlived and his wife may give birth to still-born child. If the fifth house and its lord are strong and well-disposed the unfavourable resutt said above should not be expected. If the 7th lord seated in the 3rd house is combust the wife of tile n&tive may be shortlived and sickly.
(d) 7th lord is in the 4th house - No happiness in conjugal life, tooth disease etc. The native will be truthful and virtuous. He may do well in business (trade) if the 7th lord is not afflicted but aspected by a favourable planet.
(e) 7th lord is in the 5th house - The native will be meritorious, wealthy, cheerful and happy. The favourable result may be very much effective in case of Mithuna lagna when the 7th lord vrhaspati in combination with Sukra is posited in the 5th house, and also in case of Vrscika lagna when the 7th lord Suba andVrhaspathi "re po,it d in the 5th place from lagna.
(f) 7th lord is in the 6th and 8th houses - The wife of the native w1ll be sickly, he himself will be peevish, irritable and unhappy. His business enterprise may be unsuccessful until and unless a favourable planet casts his aspect on the 7th house or its lord. The native may be attacked with any kind of disease in intestine or abdomen.
(g) 7th lord is in the 7th house - If the 7th lord occupies the 7th house the native enjoys happy conjugal life, his wife will be faithful and pious. If the 7th lord is in conjunction with Rahu, Sani and Mangal his wife may be uncontrollable, haughty and unchaste. She may be involved in an accident.
(h) 7th lord is in the 9th house - Please see the result of the position of 7th lord in 2nd house lord in the 2nd house. Only difference is that the native may be benefited by his wife or her parents and shall be lucky.
(i) 7th lord is in the 10th house  - The native will be truthful, pious and happy. If lagna rises in Mithuna, Dhanu or Mina and the 7th lord is situated in the 10th house the native will be highly educated, will build his own career by dint of his own merit and effort and shall wield pomp and power. In case of Mesa lagna the 7th lord being in the 10th house will not be so favourable as other three lagnas mentioned above if the ninth lord vrhaspati is not favourably disposed.
(j) 7th lord is in the 11th honse - The native's conjugal life will be unhappy, his children may be shortlived unless the fifth lord and the house are strong.
(k) 7th lord is in the 12th house-Indication of loss of domestic peace. If the 4th lord and the bhava are favourable, family peace may be restored occasionally ; bad health of wife, short journe,y etc. are indicated.

CHAPTER-VIII
THE EIGHTH HOUSE

The 8th house is the house of longivity. It covers the span of life.  According to Hindu theory the beginning of life herebelow is the beginning  of the  barrier between the individual soul and God. In other words life begins when the individual soul starts off the Universal soul to masquerade for its allotted span as an individual - the non-spiritual elements, though themselves also ultimately and basically spiritual - acting as the camouflage to obviously spiritual past.   Sorrow, affliction, vicissitudes of forces are the inevitable incidents to a life on earth and it is from the 8th house that all these have to be calculated. In pessimistic language, the house represents also the house of action.  For, action is the source of all vicissitudes of fortunes. The seventh house is described as the house of destruction. The 7th from the 8th house is the 2nd from lagna and the lord of the 2nd is therefore, indicated as the killer. According to this theory the 6th house attitude (i.e. the 6th bhava) is the house of sorrow and affliction. The house which destroys the 6th house attitude ( bhava ) is the 12th ( the house of destruction of the 6th i.e. the house of sorrow and affliction ) which has been described as the house of salvation or release. The individual soul merges into the Universal soul, its sojourn on earth is completed. Superficially therefore, the 6th house and the 8th give nearly the same result.  From the 8th the life span is calculated; a few specific rules are to be found in Parasari Hora, Jaimini, and other standard treatises. According to the famous treatise viz., Parasari Hora the first 24 years of life should be calculated mainly from the point of view of the dangers that beset it. Life during this period needs extra protection from these dangers, It comes into stride after these dangers are got over. The dangers are called 'Aristha' of which there are three kinds, viz., (1) Pataki, (2) Graha-ristha and (3) Ganda-ristha.


Bala-ristha : The risthas that endanger a child are termed as bala-ristha. Some of the bala-ristha yogas are mentioned here:
1. If Rahu is situated in the 8th house from lagna with Mangal and Sani the child may be involved in an accident and the leg and hand of the child may be badly injured.
2. If Ravi in the 7th or 8th house is hemmed in between three malefics and vrhaspati or Sukra is not posited in any of those places the child may be killed by a four-footed animal.
3. If Budha in his inimical house is aspected by or associated with any enemy planet and Chandra occupies the 6th or 8th house the child may be killed by any aquatic animal.
4. If the 8th place from lagna is occupied by Mangal and Chandra, and if that 8th place is their enemy house the child may die of snake-bite.
5. If vrhaspati and Budha are in the 6th place which is also their enemy house the child may be attacked by his enemy and may meet with death.
6. If Ravi occupies Simha lagna and Sani is in the 12th place the child may be blind.
7. If Ravi is in the 8th place from lagna, Chandra in the 6th and Sani is situated in the 12th the native may be blind.
8. If any house is occupied by 6 planets the native may be bereft of happiness and mental peace, and the native may be a man of suspicious mind and crazy.
9. If Chandra and Sani together are posited in Karkata ( Cancer ) the native becomes lame.  'Kshana' a mythological figure said to be vastly loamed in astrology pronounced that while these two planets ( Chandra and Sani) occupy Karkata rasi Sani makes the native lame.
10. If Ravi in his inimical house is conjoined with Mangal and Chandra without receiving any aspect from Sukra the child becomes an one-eyed person.
11.  The longivity of the child may be about 8 months only if lagna is associated with Mangal, Rahu aspects the 4th place and the 2nd or 12th house is occupied by Sani.
12. In a child's birth-chart if 12th place is occupied by Ravi and Mangal, lagna by Chandra and Sani, and at the same time the lagna is aspected by an unfavourable planet the child dies a premature death.
13. The child dies prematurely when configuration of planets in his birth chart is as follows : Chandra, Mangal and Sani occupy lagna, Ravi is situated in the 9th place and there is no aspect of vrhaspati on lagna.
14. This is also a sign of premature death if in the birthchart of a child Ravi and Mangal are positioned in the 3rd house, 8th house is occupied by Sani and lagna remains unaspccted by either vrhaspati or Sukra. In such a case the maximum period of longivity is about a month.
15. If malefic planets are posited in the 8th house and the 6th place is occupied by Chandra, and lagna is not aspected by either vrhaspati or Sukra the child does not live more than a year.
16. The following yogas bring about premature death of a child :
(i) if lagna is occupied by Mangal who is aspected by a malefic planet and remains unaspected by a benefic.
(ii) when Sani in conjunction with Mangal remains unaspected by a beneficial planet and occupies the 7th place from lagna.
(iii) Ravi in conjunction with Mangal when posited in the 8th house may kill the child in its early life.
(iv) Sani in association with Mangal is seated either in the 6th or 8th place and is not aspected by a favourable planet.
17. When 6th or 8th place falls in Karkata rasi and Budha is there and he is aspected by Chandra the child's longivity is about 4 years.
18. If the 8th place falls in Mesa or Vrscika rasi and vrhaspati is aspected by Ravi, Chandra, Mangal and Sani and remains unaspected by Sukra the child dies at the age of 3 years.
19. If the 6th, 8th or 12th house from lagna falls in Karkata or Simha rasi associated with Sukra and the aforesaid house is aspected by all malefic planets the child dies at the age of 6 years.
20. If Sani conjoined with and aspected by a malefic planet is situated in lagna and there is no aspect of favourable planet on Sani the child dies at the age of 16 years.
(i) If that Sani ( when conjoined with and aspected by a malefic planet) is only associated with unfavourable planets and is not aspected by a favourable planet the child dies within a month.
(ii) If  that Sani  is  aspected  by  both  favourable  and unfavourable planets the child may die within first one year of its age.
21. If Mesa or Vrscika rasi is the 6th, 8th or angular place ( kendra) from lagna and retrograde Sani is seated at any of those signs and is also aspected by powerful Mangal the child dies within 2 years of its age.
22. If at birth Sani, Ravi and Chandra together  are posited in a house the child dies after its birth. This is called 'Sani-ristha'.
23. If Chandra associated with a malefic planet and aspected by even a favourable planet is posited in lagna, 7th or 9th place the child does not survive long.
24. If Simha, Vrscika or Kumbha lagna rises and Rahu in lagna is aspected by many (at least three) malefics the child may die at the 7th year of age.  This is called 'Rahu-ristha',
25. If Rahu and Budha together are aspected by a papa and are posited in a kendra from lagna the child may die at the 10th year of age.
26. If waning mnon associated with lagna and malefics without receiving aspect of any favourable planet is situated in a kendra or the 8th house the child dies a premature death.
27.  Even a benefic if aspected by an unfavourable planet occupies the 6th or 8th house the child dies at a very early age.
28. If Chandra occupies lagna and Mangal is in the 7th house from lagna it is a ristha yoga for the child and its parents.
29. If lagna is occupied by Chandra and the 7th house by Rahu the child may die at its 4th year of age.
30. If Mangal being placed in the navamsa of Chandra is posited in the 7th house from lagna and remains unaspected by any benefic the child dies in the period when Chandra traverses the 77th nakshatra from lanma nakshatra ( birth star i.e. the nakshatra associated with Chandra at the time of birth ).
(a) Similarly the child dies when Chandra traverses the 77th nakshatra from Janma nakshatra if Ravi, Mangal and Sani are posited in the 5th place.
31. If in the Navamsa chakra Mangal is situated in a rasi which is the Jata-lagna ( i.e. lagna of the birthchart) and Mangal in the birthchart is not aspected by vrhaspati, Or
(a) If Chandra is posited in the 5th house from lagna and occupies Mangal's Navamsa and i_s not aspected by vrhaspati early death of the child is indicated.
32. Death is possible due to snake bite if Rahu in conjunction with Mangal is posited in the 8th house. Combination of these two planets in the 8th house may also cause death by poison.   But if Rahu is favoured by a benefic the malefie result to some extent may be mitigated. This is also to be noted that the native himself is responsible for loss of domestic peace if in his birth chart Rahu occupies the 8th place from lagna.
33. If Chandra and malefic planets occupy any Kendra and lagna acquires "Chandra Hora" and the baby is born at any Sandhya Kala or at Gandanta there is chance of danger of life of the child. At the time of sunset upto 3 dandas ( i.e. 1 hr, 12 min.} after disappearance of half of the disc of the sun is Swayam Sandhya Kala. At the time af sunrise upto 3 dandas after appearance of half of the disc of the sun in the sky is called Prata Sandhya kala.
34. In the native's birth chart if lagna falls in Vrscika rasi and 'krura grahas' ("Krura" means cruel. Ravi, Mangal and Sani are termed as 'Krura grahas', "Grahas" means planets) are situated within the first part of the birth chart and favourable planets occupy last part the child must die a premature death.
   
   
------------------------------------------------------
Deleted  pages 186 .. 191
______________________________________________________

Pitri-ristha :
Pitri ristha means that kind of ristha that may endanger the life of the child's father.
1. Ravi signifies father and Chandra mother. If these planets are situated between malefics, or associated with or aspected by malefics parents may die,
2. If Sani is situated in lagna, Mangal in the 7th place and Chandra in the 6th house from lagna this is a death inflicting yoga for the father of the child.
3. If vrhaspati occupies lagna and the 2nd house is conjoined with Sani, Ravi, Mangal and Budha the father may die at the time of marriage of the child.
4. If the baby is born in the navamsa rasi of Mangal and lagna is aspected by Ravi and Sani the father dies before the birth of the child.
5. If Rahu and vrhaspati being in their inimical house occupy lagna or the 4th place from lagna the father dies at the child's 23rd year of age.
6. If the 6th or 8th house from lagna is occupied by Chandra, Mangal and Sani who are not aspected by vrhaspati the yoga may prove fatal tor both the child and the father.
7. Within 7 days from the birthdate of the child the father may die if the 8th place is occupied by Chandra, the 2nd place by vrhaspati and Rahu and the 4th place is occupied by Sani and mangal.
8. If Ravi is aspected by three malefics without any aspect of any beneficial planet on Ravi or he ( Ravi ) is not associated with any favourable planet the yoga may endanger the life of the father
9. If Mangal is placed in the 8th house and the 12th place is occupied by three unfavourable planets without being aspected by or conjoined with any beneficial planet is also a fatal yoga for the father.
10. This is also a ristha yoga for both the child and the father if Ravi is in the 8th place and rahu is in lagna.
11. This is also a latal yoga for the father if Ravi and Mangal are conjoined with each other and aspected by Sani or Ravi and Sani together are posited in a house and aspected by Mangal.

Matri-ristha :
1. If Chandra is aspected by three malefics and the 6th place from Chandra is occupied by an inauspicious planet the mother of the child meets with death.
2. If Chandra being in conjunction with and aspected by malefics is posited in the 7th or 8th place from any other unfavourable planet or is aspected by a powerful malefic the mother of the child dies. This is also a Matri-ristha yoga if the Kendra position is not occupied by a favourable planet and the 4th place from Chandra ( if that house is inimical to Chandra) is occupied by a malefic.
3. If the malefic planets are posited in the 4th, 6th, 10th and 12th places from lagna life of the mother and the father may be in danger.
4. When the birth of the child happens to be at  night, and both. Chandra and Sukra are situated in a malefic house or houses and they are also conjoined with other unfavourable planets the mother dies within 6 months from the birthdate of the child.
5. If Sani and Mangal together ( in any rasi ) are in the same navamsa and occupy Kendra position from Chandra the mother dies in the baby's childhood and the child is looked after by a stepmother.
6. From waning moon if the 5th and 9th places are occupied by malefic planets only the mother dies within 6 months from the birthdate of the child.
7. If Chandra is hemmea in between Sani and Mangal or is in conjunction with them the mother dies.
8. If the 4th place from lagna or Chandra is occupied by a powerful malefic and the Kendra position from that malefic is occupied by another strong unfavourable planet the mother dies.
9. The mother of the baby dies within 8 days from its birth if lagna falls in Mina and navamsa lagna be in Karkata, and Ravi and Sukra being in Kumbha rasi are aspected by Sani.
10. If Kendra and trikona houses are occupied by malefics the mother dies.
11. If Chandra conjoined with any evil planet is posited in 6th or 8th house and Mangal occupies the 7th place from lagna the mother meets with death.
12. If the 4th place from lagna or Chandra is occupied by a powerful malefic and tbhe Kendra position from that malefic is occupied by another strong unfavourable planet the mother dies.
13. If Chandra is hemmed in between Sani and Mangal or is in conjunction with them the mother dies.
N.B. though Chandra has an important role in determining the 'ristha' of the baby's mother the fourth house and its lord are no less important.

Bala-ristha ( early death of the child ) :
( This part of bala-ristha should be read along with the ristha yogas explained earlier in this chapter )
Primarily Eighth house indicates Ayu or Longivity, but that is not all. The house also signifies litigation, victory over or defeat by enemies, imprisonment, domestic troubles, worries and anxieties, abdomen and pelvic region of the body, rectum, secret organ, legacies, unearned wealths, wills, disgrace and  degradation, cause of death, place and surroundings of death.

Occupation of the 8th Lord in different bhav and results thoreof:
1. If the 8th lord occupies lagna or the 7th place from lagna the wife or the husband may die a premature death and the native may marry again. Remarriage  depends  on  many  factors which  must  be considered before the final judgment is pronounced. The 8th lord in lagna may be the cause of immense trouble, such as, the native may be possessing very bad health, he will have no easy walk of life.
2. If the 8th  lord is posited in the 2nd place - the native cannot acquire good wealth and he cannot restore his lost property. The 2nd place is 'marakasthan' ( death inflicting house), So if the 8th lord is situated in the 2nd place the native may fall badly ill during dasa-bhukti of the 2nd lord under the major period of the lord of the 8th house. Besides, the native may suffer from some sort of ailments in throat.
3. Relation between brothers and sisters may  be strained if the 8th lord occupies the 3rd house. Health of brothers and sisters may not run well.
4. Position of the 8th lord in the 4th or 10th house is deemed to be very bad. The native may be mean-minded, malicious and jealous of others. His parents may die in bis childhood. There may be ups and down in his vocational career and mental peace may remain disturbed.
5. When the 8th lord is posited in the 5th house the native may not be a man of sharp intellect unless any one of Budha and vrhaspati is powerful and favourably posited in Kendra,or Kona.
6. If the 8th lord occupies the 6th place the native will be sickly, there is danger of Snakebite and also fear from water in his childhood.
7. If the 8th lord occupies the 8th house and the house itself is his ( 8th lord's ) exalted or own sign the native may live long, but if the said 8th lord is conjoined with or aspected by a malefic, or acquires unfavourable Sasthyamsa { one-sixtyeth part of a rasi) the native may be shortlived.
8. The 8th lord in the 9th house ( house of luck ) is awefully bad. The native can not thrive well in life, he may be a sinful man, unscrupulous, always hankers after other's wealth and wife, or he may be barren or childless.
9. If the 11th house is occupied by the 8th lord his relatives may be hostile to him and he may not have cordial relations with his elder brothers or sister. Of course all these depend on the strength and favourable position of the 3rd lord. Again, if the 3rd house is occupied by a benefic and its lord is wellposited the unfavourable result may be ameliorated to a great extent.
10. If the 8th lord in conjunction with a natural malefic is posited in the 12th place the native may be shortlived, this also may be the case if the 6th lord also be in the 12th place.
11. The 8th lord when posited in the 11th will not be favourable for the native to earn as much money as in case of other lords but if the 2nd and 11th lords or/and houses are favourable the native may earn a lot by unscrupulous means particularly when the 8th lord bemg a natural malefic occupies the  11th  house.  Again if  the house of gain ( 11th ) is not afflicted and the 8th lord be in  the 11th the native may get wealth or property by inheritance.
12. 1f the 8th lord is Sukra and the planet is associated with or related to a naturally inauspicious planet the native may be attacked with kidney trouble, ailments due to inflammation of prostate gland or any other urinary trouble, such as diabetes, In case the native is a woman besides urinary trouble referred to above she may suffer from uterine disease or disease of the. ovary, If that Sukra is conjoined with or aspected by Mangal the native may have to undergo surgical operation due to any of those diseases. The 8th lord being in conjunction with Mangal or similar other cruel planets may be the cause of disease of the anus or rectum ( such as piles, fissure etc. ). The combination of the 8th lord and Mangal, or association or the 8th lord with the lord of the 6th house may be the cause or involvement into litigation, imprisonment or debt. Combination of or relation between the lords of 8th and 6th houses are not always unfavourable, rather the native may pass over many hardies that beset him or her in his ( or her ) career and prosper in life provided they are not aspected by or related to any other bhava Lord ( excepting the lord of the 12th house ), so says Uttarkalamrita and Parasari Hora. Again if the 8th house is occupied by more than one malicious planet the native may suffer from diseases of anus or rectum and there is possibility of his suffering from enlargement of scrotum.

Unbappy or painful end of life

1. If the 8th lord is in Pasa or Sarpa Drekkan the native, may die of snake bite or may commit suicide by hanging. ( The 1st and the last drekkan of Karkata, Vrscika and Mina. raais are termed as Pasa or Sarpa drekkan )
2. If the 8th house or the lord is aspected by any powerful planet the native may die due to disease caused by that planet (It may be noted that Ravi and Mangal indicate bile, Chandra. rheumatism, wind and phlegm, Budha indicates bile and phlegm. vrhaspati phlegm,	Sukra	Pneumatics and	phlegm, Sani pneumatics and  rheumatism, and Rahu  signifies pneumatics only )

The native may die when the humour indicated by death inflicting planet is irritated or the state of the bodily humours become unbalanced.
(a) If the 8th place is aspected by Ravi death due to fire.
(b) If the 8th place is aspected by Chandra watery disease.
(c) If the 8th  place is aspected  by Mangal death may be caused by any kind of weapon, or surgical operation.
(d) If that house is aspected by Budha it may be a serious. type of fever that cannot be easily diagonised.
(e) If vrhaspati is the cause of death the suffering will be due to cough and cold or any such disease relating to phlegm or digestive organ.
3. If the waning Chandra be posited in the 8th place and is aspected ( dristha )  by  powerful Sani the  native may die  of disease of anus, eye or any wound caused by a weapon.

Planets in the Eighth house.

Astrological savants are of opinion that there should not be any planet favourable or unfavourable, in the 8th house. Because any planet whether he is a natural Subha ( benefic) or asubha ( malefic) may produce unfavourable result in one way or other. This is also a fact that the standard of beneficial or malicious result depends on the nature and strength of each planet. There is no doubt about it that the result will vary according to strength of planets positing in the 8th house.

1. Ravi In the 8th house: It is needless to repeat here that Ravi signifies father, soul, head, nobility etc. (please see the Karakata chapter). When he is situated in the 8th house the native may suffer from bilious ailments, he may lack personality, vitality, energy and vigour, because Ravi naturally stands for energy, vitality, pomp, grandeur, greatness and nobility.  Naturally when this planet is in the Rth house he will be afflicted, in consequence the native will be narrow-minded, mentally weak and sickly, he may die of epilepsy, paralysis or sunstroke. An afflicted Ravi may be the cause of loss of brain power. When Ravi occupies the 8th house and is aspected by Sani and there is no aspect of any benefic on Ravi the native under that circumstance will pass through many vicissitudes of life, may suffer from worries and anxieties almost all through his life. His professional career may be adversely effected. In a female horoscope the planet seated in the 8th house may cause widowhood.

2. Chandra in the 8th house : Chandra represents mother, mind,	lungs	nutrition, morality, etc.  If the planet is situated in the 8th house the native is likely to be sickly, his mother may not live long or she may die during the childhood of the native.  If Chandra in the 8th house is aspected by 3 papas ( malefics] or is situated between malicious planets the child's mother and child itself may die at an early age. This is called Bala-ristha. Chandra may be the cause of lunacy if he is aspected by powerful Sani,  Mangal or rahu, this configuration of planets. ( viz., Chandra', relation with Sani, mangal and Rahu) may be the cause of epilepsy, piles and indigestion. If the 8th house is a watery sign and Chandra is posited there with vrhaspati being unfavourable due to ownenhip of a malefic house the native may suffer from asthma, phthisis, consumption etc. He may be susceptible to cough and cold only in case lagna and its lord are well-disposed in a favourable sign.

3. Mangal in the 8th house : Mangal among other things denotes physical strength and energy, activity, effort, brothers and sisters, sinews, museular tissues, weapons, strife, war, litigation, accidents, etc. If Mangal is situated in 8th house it indicates sudden death owing to surgical operation, piles, fissure, plague, cholera. dysentery, small pox, meningitis etc. He may be involved in a litigation or debt. Mangal in the 8th house may cause wife's death in case of a male and if he is associated with 8th house in a woman's horoscope the husband may die. If Mangal in the 8th house is conjoined with a malefic the native may be fond of women of bad repute, in case of a woman, the lady may be illegally attached to a paramour by discarding her husband. This is also termed as Koja dosh.

4. Budha in the 8th house : Budha represents learning, education, wisdom, inttelligence, art, tongue, power of speech, nerves, humour etc. When the planet is situated in the 8th house the native may be dull, his educational career will not be smooth running (them may be many obstructions ), his manner of talk or conversation may not be convincing, he may be attacked with such diseases tbat can not be diagonised easily. When Budha in the 8th house is strong and is not associated with or aspected by any malefic the native may be wise, prudent, well-mannered, but afflicted Budha in the 8th house may be the cause of many evils and worries. In the horoscope of a woman afflicted Budha in the 8th house causes unhappy incidents in the family and her husband may have to bear the brunt of those evil events.

5. vrhaspati in the 8th house : vrhaspati in the 8th house is not a benefactor for the native, He may not have any child at all or his children may die premature death. In a woman's horoscope vrhaspati in the 8th house may cause abortions, or her children may die early. The native may be mean-minded, he may earn his livelihood as a menial, he will be untruthful and a religious hypocrite, he may be dependant on others and lead a miserable life. But vrhaspati in the 8th house gives long life to the native.

6. Sakra no the 8th house : Sukra is a significator of marriage, wife or husband, attactment, material pleasure, sexual act, passion, love, beauty, elegant eyes, fine arts, scandals, venereal diseases etc. Phala dipika writes that Sukra in the 8th house makes the native a longlived and rich, and a ruler of earth. Astrological savants are of opinion that only powerful Sukra in the 8th house can give the aforesaid good results. If he is weak the native may have to face scandals, he may be adulterous, may visit public women, may be addicted to wine and women, may suffer from venereal disease etc. When the planet is in conjunction with Mangal or they are related to each other in any other way there may be loss of life partner at his or her premature age and the native may be a man of loose morals. Sukra with Sani in the 8th house may make the native impotent. In the horoscope of a woman when Sukra is posited in the 8th house and the 7th house and its lord are not favourable the native's conjugal life is totally marred. This is also a aign of premature death of the husband ( or wife ). Presence of Sukra and Sani in the 8th house may cause diabetes, kidney trouble or inflammation of prostate gland. In the horoscope of a woman the native may suffer from diseases of ovary or uterus or both if Sukra is situated in the 8th house. If Mangal is conjoined with Sukra, she may have to undergo surgical operation due to those ailments.

7. Sani in the 8th house : Primarily Sani is the indicator of death.  He signifies sorrows, afflictions, disappointment, miseries, meannesa, demoralization. ( To get elaborate idea of Sani'a significance please read 'Karakata' chapter). Eighth house is astrologically termed as 'Randhra'. The term means a hole or a bore of a tube through which all poisonous substance may get in or get out. Sani controls that hole or bore. If he is in joyful mood he allows the vicious instincts in a man to get into that bore and sends back the same after proper sterilization, thereby the planet takes the responsibility of moulding a sinful person into a 'sadhaka' i.e. a true devotee. So, a beneficial Sani is a blessing in disguise. He withholds at first, later to deal in double measure.  When Sani is the ruler in the horoscope he makes slow plodding ascent and the promise of success early in life is scant, But as the years roll by the are begins to curve upward the  native rises to  prominence in life. Initially Sani stands for  worries and anxieties, impurity, insincerity and sinful acts. So, when he is in the 8th house the native  may have to suffer from serious type of miseries and worries, be is to struggle bard to ward off obstacles that beset on his way to prosperity, he faces monetary stringency, develops nasty habits, every effort in his life may be thwarted by enemies or by some sort of impediments about which he never thought of before their exact appearance in the field of action.  Sani in the 8th place makes a man cruel, peevish, dishonest. Afflicted Sani in the 8th house may be the cause of suffering from colic pain, gout or rheumatism, idiosyncracies, windy ailments, defective eyesight ( vision ) and tooth trouble. When Sani is afflicted by Ravi the man becomes depraved and dishonest and struggle in his life knows no bound. Sani in the 8th house gives long life to the native but if the planet is conjoined  with  Mangal  death  may  occur  due  to surgical operation, if he is in conjunction with Sukra the native may be impotent. Of course if Sani and Sukra are aspected by a benefic the native may be sexually normal. In the horoscope of a woman Sani in the 8th house deprives the native of mental peace in conjugal or family life. Moreover she may be a widow. This unfavourable result more often is experienced when that Sani and Sukra are in conjunction with Mangal.

8. Rahu in the 8th house : Rahu represents litigation, corruption, thievest serpents, duplicity, quarrelsome habit etc. When Rahu is posited in the 8th house the native becomes dishonest, mean, degraded and quarrelsome. Rahu in the 8th house gives the native ample opportunities to earn money through dishonest method, he is unscrupulous and does not hesitate to cheat his friends and near and dear ones. Rahu along with weak Chandra when seated in the 8th house brings about premature death of the life partner.  In the birth cbart of a woman this yoga is very unfavourable and the lady may lose her husband at her-early age. Death is possible due to snakebite if Rahu in conjunction with Mangal occupies the 8th house. Combination of these two planets may also cause death by poison. The native himself may be responsible for loss of domestic  peace in whose horoscope Rahu is situated in the 8th house but if Rahu is favoured by a benefic the unfavourable result may to some extent be mitigated.

9. Ket in the 8th house : Ketu signifies quarrels, selfishness, secret intrigues and company, backbiting, vicious tendencies, mendicancy, resignation and surrender to God and salvation.   Ketu in the 8th house does not give domestic peace, he is the  cause of unfriendly relation or quarrel with relatives. If the planet is situated in the 8th house and Mangal also is there the  native may suffer from piles, hernia, or any other secret disease. In the horoscope of a female the native may be a widow early in life if Ketu is in the 8th place from lagna. In case the planet is conjoined with or aspected by a powerful benefic the evil result as said above may seldom be expected. Ketu in the 8th place indicates disappointment, shift from one place to another, struggle in life.

Cancellation of Ristha yoga : Ristha yogas, bala-ristha, Pitri-ristha or Matri-risthas are considered to be cancelled under the following configuration of planets:
1. A powerful vrhaspati rising in Lagna cancels all kinds of risthas.
2. If the lagna-lord is powerful; posited in any kendra and is aspected by a benefic without being aspected by any malefic the child inspite of bala-rristha is blessed with long life and he is lucky.
3. When any one of Chandra, Budha, vrhaspati and Sukra ia strong and  occupies a Kendra or Kona position ristha yogs are taken to be nullified.
4. When malefic planets that bring forth ristha yogas are posited in a favourable house in navamsa chart, or favourably situated in majority of Sada or Dasa-Vargas and also at tho same time are aspected by favourable planet or planets in tho birth chart the ristha yogas are deemed to be cancelled.
5. When any one among Chandra, Budha, vrhaspati and Sukra occupies a favourable house, favourable navamsa and Drekkan - all kinds of ristha yogas lose their baneful stings and the child lives long.
6. When all the planets  are situated in Shirsodaya rasis ristha yogas can not do any harm to the baby. [ Mesa, Vrsa, Karkata, Dhanu and Makara rasis are called Pristhodaya rasis, all other six rasis (Mithuna, Simha, Kanya, Tula, vrscika and Kumbha) are Shirsodaya rasis. Mina rasi is called Woovayodaya rasi meaning both Pristhodaya and Shirsodaya rasi].
7. When  at  birth Chandra is posited in Budha, vrhaspati or Sukra drekkan ristha yoga is cancelled. Even if Chandra under the aforesaid  circumstance is situated in the 8th house ristha yoga is to be taken as cancelled.
8. Ristha yogas will be of no importance if the full Moon ( Purna Chandra ) is posited in a favourable house, Navamsa or is situated between favourable planets or she is conjoined with any benefic.
9. Ristha yogas are nullified when Rahu occupies Mesa, Vrsa or Karkata identical with 3rd, 6th or 11th house from lagna.
10. When lagna rises in Tula, Dhanu, or Mina rasi and Sani is there in lagna all the bala-ristbas are considered to be cancelled.
11. If Rahu is posited in Simha lagna all kinds of ristha are to be taken as cancelled. A child born with Rahu in Simha lagna will be lucky and prosperous.
12. All the risthas are nullified if Sukra occupies 3rd, 5th, 9th or 11th house and vrhaspati is posited in even rasi identical with the 7th house from lagna ( Vrsa, Karkata, Kanya, Vrscika, Makara and Mina rasis are even rasis.  Even rasi is a synonym of Sama rasi, other six rasis are odd or Visama rasis ).
13. Parents of the baby will be happy to see the prosperity of their child when in his or her birthchart the 4th house is occupied by a benefic and vrhaspati is posited in any kendra or kona house, ristha yogas in the chart of the baby will be of no avail.
14. If Ravi in case of birth at day time or Chandra in case of birth at night is powerful and is seated in  the 11th place from lagna innumerable faults arising out of ristha yogas are
vanished.
15. If the 3rd, 6th or 11th house is occupied by any one of Sani, Mangal and Ravi ristha yogas are considered to be dispelled.
16. If Chandra is posited in a favourable house and is aspected by the lagnapathi ( lagna-lord ) all ristha yogas are deemed to be cancelled,
17. If the lord of the rasi where Chandra is situated is powerful and is aspected by or conjoined with a benefic all ristha yogas are deemed to be cancelled.
18. The 8th lord positing in the 6th or 12th house may make the native sickly. In his early life there is danger from water or snake.

A few Instances of rlstha yoga1 that are nullified under special conditions :
1. Lagna in Dhanu rasi, Kumbba is occupied by Sani, Ravi, Budha and Ketu, vrhaspati in Mesa, Rabu in Simba, and Tula ( the 11th house from lagna ) is occupied by Mangal. The native inspite of serious illness or accident on more than one occasion was saved. For Chandra is powerful due to aspect of lagna-lord vrhaspati, be is in the 11th house from lagna and vrhaspati is situated in Kona from lagna. Further, Sukra, the lord of Chandra rasi is powerful in his exalted house and posited in a Kendra position from lagna.
2. Lagna rises at Karkata rasi, vrhaspati and Rahu are i11 lagna, Chandra in Simha, Ketu in Makara, Ravi and Sukra in Mina, Budha in Mesa, Sani in Vrsa and Mangal in Mithuna. This lady was seriously ill at the age of 10 and 22 years. On both occasions, her relatives lost all hope of life and doctors also were at their wit's end and seemed to be puzzled. Dr. B. C. Roy was consulted and the lady came round after a few days. In this case also lagna falls in vrhaspati's Navamsa, Chandra in his own Navamsa and Sani is situated in the 11th house from lagna.


-------------------------------------
Longivity or Ayu
this part deleted page 205 - 215
lots of calculations
---------------------------------------


CHAPTER--IX

BHAGYA BHAVA
The Ninth house

The bhavas that are most essential to the determination of the  quality and character of tho horoscope are  (1)  Lagna, (2)  Bhagya and  (3) Karma bhavas.  The three go together, they are integrated. For, it is easy enough to perceive that as there has to be a wall before there is a good painting on it, so, there has to be a strong lagna to have a good Bhagya and good Karma. And since Bhagya and Karma are really the same thing in the circular order karma determining the bhagya {destiny) and bhagya determining the karma they would always go together with the lagna. In fact the trio are inseparable. Every lagna has its bhagya and every bhagya has its karma. The karma determines the bhagya and both effect the individual that is lagna.

Graha Yamal an authoritative ancient text sets forth the sovereign importance of karma bhava and bhagya bhava in these words "The Karmasthana is very important and has to be studied very carefully. If there is no graha (planet) here or this house is not aspected by any graha the native roams about in abject proverty. Also when the bhagyasthana and the karmasthana are without any planet or unaspected, the result is deplorable". So, the dharma bhava (bhagya, dharma and 11th house are synonymous) and the karma bhava have to be rightly evaluated in a horoscope. The sage Parasara also has emphasized the importance of bhagya and karma. Another name for bhagya bhava is Purba Janma (previous birth). 'Daiva', 'Punya', 'Dharma' and 'Swavaba' are aatrological synonyms. A favourable 'daiva' helps the individual to take all hurdles without much difficulty. An unfavourable 'daiva' raises obstacles at every step. It is only when tho individual is exceptionally favoured with a strong karmasthana that he can take all the obstacles in hia stride  and  make satisfactory progress in life. We are all very finite beings, bounded by mortality on one side and birth on the other.

Not all of us can dupiicate the eminence of Shri Rama Chandra or the knowledge, competence and devotion of Arjuna. Nor are we blessed with advice such as Srikrishna's at Kurukshetra and that is why we are supplicants to 'daiva' for favours. "O life as futile then as fail. O for thy voice to soothe and bless. What hope of answer and redress. Behind the veil, behind the veil." Our fate in this life at least as far as we can determine, is determined by the law of Karma. Our destiny is our Will and Effort in previous birth. The great sage Vasistha tells Sri Rama Chandra that even the mightiest mountain like Sumeru can be conquered by determined effort, human will, and wisdom born of experience. So, it is nothing strange that Will Power can neutralise the result of evil deeds in the previous existence. Strong Will conquers destiny as easily as the strong person defeats the weaker one. In other words if 'bhagya' and 'karma• bhavas together with their lords are favourable, luck favours the native, otherwise the native has to go through against heavy Odds. To overcome unfavourable destiny. continued and persevering effort is necessary. The 'Strong Will' itself is also the result of 'Karma', whether in this or in  previous birth.  A native would not have the strength to develop his Will or opportunities of doing it if previous births or this birth tilt the balance against him.  But since the greater part of the determinant is and  will alway remain unknown, like the submarine part of an iceberg, we are concentrating only on the visible part.

The dhana bhava and karma bhava both are also included in bhagya bhava. The	native's wealth, name and fame and distinction may be at their best if there is favourable bhagya yoga in the horoscope. As told before there is a link	between previous birth and the worldly happiness and exuberant career of the present birth. In judging the beneficial condition of the   bhagya-lord we must note the condition of bhagya-karta, which is the secondary ruler of destiny. The lord of the rasi where bhagyapathi is situated is the ruler or controller of the native's destiny. If the bhagya-karta planet is happily disposed, aspected by or conjoined with benefic planet or planets the native shall also be lucky. Of course, we must not overlook the quality of the 9th lord ; both bhagyapathi and bhagya-karta being favourable will do immense good to the native.

The following configuration of planets may constitute good bhagya yogas:
1. If lagna or Chandra is in Vargottam Navamsa and the second house from Ravi is occupied by a benefic planet, or if the atma-karaka planet is placed in any kendra from lagna and kendra position is not vacant. 
2. If kendra position or positions are occupied by benefic planets, bhagyapathi is aspected by or is in conjunction with benefics, and  again bhagyapathi is in benefic Navamsa and has attained favourable Vargas the native will be blessed with good luck.
3. According to rules stated earlier if the lord of the 9th house is strong and favourable, vrhaspati the natural indicator of fortune is placed favourably in Sada-Varga, the bhagyakarta is not placed in any malefic house, not aspected by or conjoined with malefic planets, or bhagyapathi is not combust or debilitated the native will be very fortunate.
4. On the whole a favourable bhagyapathi occupying kendra or kona houses from lagna will raise the native from ordinary position to a higher status in life.
5. It is better for lagnapathi to be posited in lagna or in any place from within lagna and the 7th house ; under that circumstance (a) the best yoga will be if vrhaspati and both 9th and 10th lords are favourably related to each other. (b) Again bhagyapathi, bhagya-karta and Sukra occupying kendra or kona position will impart very favourable result in improving the native's fortune. (c) When the strong lord of luck is posited in lagna and receives the full aspect of vrhaspati the native will be held in high esteem by the king of the land and he will be very fortunate.
6. Excepting the 7th lord if other lord or lords of kendra sthanas, the lord of the 5th house and lagna-lord are related to the lord of luck the native shall be lucky and shall prosper in life, This is also a bhagya yoga (wealth giving yoga) which was narrated while dealing with dhana bhava.
7. When all the planets occupy six places serially or in any other manner in houses in-between lagna and the 7th house it s called "Ekabali" yoga.  This yoga is highly auspicious and, brilliant.	Rahu and Ketu have no place in forming this yoga. Pandit Jahawarlal	Nehru's	chart shows	this yoga	(some astrologers call it 'Samrat yoga'),
8. When the full moon conjoins with Mangal or Sani and occupy the 9th house from lagna the native flourishes in many, ways, The age of the beginning of prosperity may be reckoned from the period of dasa-antardasa of that planet who is strong and favourable and denotes luck. The age indicated by that planet may also be the age at which the native will be blessed with good fortune.
9. (a) When vrhaspati being in the house of luck is aspected by all other planets (rahu and Ketu are not considered as planets) ; or (b) When all the planets aspect lagna or Chandra the exaltation of bhagya bhava is indicated, When lagna or Chandra receives the aspect of all the planets it is 'Maha bhagya yoga'. This yoga is found in the birth-chart of Mahapravu Shri Chaitanya. He is called God-in-Carnate.
10. Lord of the rasi occupied by Chandra when placed in an auspicious bhava, in his exalted or own house or otherwise favourable the native will be fortunate.
11. The following configuration of planets and bhava-lords indicate prosperous life in different ages of the native, viz.,(a) , When vrhaspati occupies the 9th house, and the 9th lord is posited in a Kendra the native is favoured with good luck at the age of 20 years. (b) When the lord of luck is in the 2nd place and the 2nd lord is in the 9th prosperity of the native is indicated after 32 years of age. (c) When the natural benefics are exalled and strong 9th lord is in the 9th the native is favoured with luck in many a ways after his 36 year of age,  The age of the  planet, that indicates the increase of prosperity vis-a-vis fortune is the actual period of the beginning of good time.

Religious inclination : When the full moon is posited in the house of religion (synonym of the house of luck or 9th house) the subject becomes highly religious minded, he enjoys in his young age the material happiness, wealth, name and fame and people call him a man of great fortune, If the waning moon be in the 9th house the result will be just the reverse. (Mangal in the 9th house has a destructive influence over luck).

Religious inclination (Punya or Virtue) and Emancipation (or Salvation) :
l. If the 10th lord occupies the 9th house and strong 9th lord is aspected by or in conjunction with vrhaspati and Sukra the subject is a great devotee of God ; by persevering effort to realise God Almighty he can attain a place of high order among great sages.
2. If the lord of Karmasthana is conjoined with 4 planets the subject attains salvation.
3. 4 or more planets in a rasi make a man a 'Sannyasi' (an ascetic).
4. When lord of lagna unaspected by any other planet aspects Sani or Sani unaspected by any othr planet aspects lord of lagna the native becomes a mendicant.
5. In spite of Sannyas Yoga (Yoga of asceticism) if the 10th lord is aspected by Rahu, Sannyas yoga is nullified.


Occupation of 9th lord in different bhava :

1. If 9th lord is in the 1st house : When the 9th lord occupies the lagna the aubject is pious, intelligent, always cheerful, and devoted to brahmins and gods.
2. If 9th lord is in the 2nd house:  If the 9th lord is poaited in the 2nd  house the native becomes rich, learned, famous and he is held in high esteem by many.
3. If 9th lord is in the 3rd house : The native has affinity for his friends and associates, has many good friends and be has happy conjugal life.
4. If 9th lord is in the 4th house:  The native is very respectful to his father, inherits good wealth from his father, possesses landed property. He is benevolent to his friends and earns name and fame.
5. If 9th lord is in the 5th houe : The native is ver beautiful to look at, lucky and is the son of an illustrious father.
6. If 9th lord is in the 6th house:  The native is inclined to sinful acts, and meets with great obstacles on his way to prosperity.
7. If 9th lord is in the 7th house: The native's wife is beautiful, pious, and lucky, and he prospers through business pursuits.
8. If 9th lord is in the 8th house :  The subject may be dishonest, unlucky and may be a man of wicked character.
9. If 9th lord is in the 9th house : The subject is very lucky, may earn name and fame for his religious deeds; he is truthful, devoted to God and is respectful to brahmins and superiors.
10. If 9th lord is in the 10th house: This is a favourable yoga of a very high order.  Indian astrologers call it 'Kshetra simhasana yoga'.  Due to the presence cf this brilliant yoga the subject will be prosperous, wealthy and honest ; he is respected by the king of the land. His mother is also fortunate.
11. If 9th lord is in the 11th house : The native will be wealthy, pious, favoured by king and is blessed with long life.
12. If 9th lord is in the 12th house : The native has good academic career, he will be learned. If the 9th lord is a natural benefic the native will he a noted personality in the society and popular. If the planet is a natural malefic the native is cunning, extravagant, and is a man of bad conduct.

The Tenth or Karma bhava.

The tenth bhava signifies profession, vocation, supremacy, honour, environment, father (particularly father's prosperity and wealth). The career of the native is to be ju1ged from the 10th house and its lord. The characteristic of that planet (10th lord) may give a clue for finding out the nature of profession or vocation, though there are other factors too which will be discussed in the following paragraphs. But nevertheless it must be admitted that it is very difficult to give a decisive verdict about the nature of a man's professional career. Easy approaches and easy answers are seldom correct.

We have described the speciality of the 10th bhava at the time of delineation of the 9th house.  We may elaborate those points here again. Karma starts as soon as one is born, breathing itself is one form of it and there are of course many others. It is "Karma" that co-exists with an individual, at every stage of this multifaceted life. The nature of it may be good, bad or indifferent, but karma and the individual are almost synonymous. One doe, not exist without the other. A man rises and falls, enjoys or suffers according to the kind of 'Karma' he does. The nature of 'Karma' again is determined by the nature of his personality itself which again is another name 'Bhagya'. In this sense destiny is character and character is destiny, To understand it better, it is only necessary to explain it this way. Given any particular conjunction of circumstances in life it should be evident that one person would not react to it exactly the same way as another. Various people would react variously. What makes this difference? Obviously the varying characters or make-ups of different people. The situation that confronts them is substantially the same, it is only the different character of the different people that brings about that different reaction.

The Tenth house in a horoscope has been affirmed as a symbol of Karma and naturally it is a most important house. Of course all the twelve houses are interrelated, they are like a complex web.  Each house contains everything that relates to man; and if one follows and analyses each item of life, that is to say each event upto its most delicate and subtle filaments at the source, one would get lost at the intricacies in the interrelationships. For practical purposes, however, certain featuresin each have been emphasisised and those points of emphasis determine the significance of each house, as also with the planets. Each one of the planets is capable of giving and destroying, affecting events and determining the character of composite results. It is only the emphasis that make the difference. Against twelve houses there are the nine 'Grahas' ; and there are minute subdivisions in placing. This is the mathematical background.

The Tenth considered as said above is a most 1important house. It is contiguous to the 9th which is considered as bhagya. The 9th and the 10th houses intertwine, that is to say, 'bhagya' and 'karma' intertwine are quite a good basis for correct predictions. Some assert that the fifth house also is important, But then the lagna is the most important house, it takes precedence over the rest and the rasi (the house where moon is posited) comes next. It is again a matter of emphasis - all the twelve houses are important and should be reckoned within any complete work-out.

If the Tenth bhava and its lord are good, good karma follows. As has been explained previously if the 10th house is occupied by benefics or aspected by them it is good, if otherwise it is bad or weak.

Ravi : Ravi is also a factor in promoting a man's karma because he indicates progress in one's career, supremacy, administrative distinction etc. So, we must discuss bow and when Ravi helps rise a native.
1. When strong Ravi aspected by a benefic occupies the 10th house he paves the way for even a poor man or a man who comes of very low social status to affluence and prosperity in life. Even a fourth grade servant of an Institution rises to a very high position on account of powerful Ravi. Some eminent astrologers are of opinion that as an indicator of karma-bhava Ravi's presence in the bhagyasthan (9th place) will act adveresely if the planet is not aspected by or associated with a benefic planet. In case of Dhanu lagna and Vrscika lagna Ravi will react favourably if he is in the 10th house, Readers would certainly appreciate the reason of this deviation. For  Dhanu lagna Ravi being the 9th lord is very favourable in the 10th house, it is 'Kshetra Simhasana yoga' and in case of Vrscika lagna, Ravi himself is the lord of the 10th house.
2. A weak Ravi when aspected by or is in conjunction with malefic (or when he occupies any dusthana) gives unfavourable result and the subject has to cross many hurdles on his way to progress. Sometimes the native's strenuous efforts to ward off those obstacles do not yield satisfactory result.
3. When Ravi is associated with Sani or both the planets oppose each other (i.e. one of them is in the 7th house from the other) even the best Raja yogas (very favourable yogas - we shall explain the term later on) do not give satisfactory result,
4. When Ravi and Sani are situated within 7-1/2 degrees from  each other even the most favourable yogas become less effective or we may say, in spite of best Raja yogas the subject can not thrive well.

Positions of some of the indicator of Karma bhava and of the 10th lord and results thereby are related herebelow :

When the lord of the tenth house in a birth chart is without any strength and indicators of Karmabhava, viz., Ravi, vrhaspati and Sukra also are weak the subject is apt to change his. mind off and on and cannot come to any decision while occasion demands, and at the same time he indulges in anti-social activities.

How to judge Karma bhava ?
In judging the merit of Karma bhava positional strength of Ravi, vrhaspati and Sukra and also their strength acquired through different Vargas, their relation with other planets are to be considered. Of these three planets Ravi's role is very important and next are  vrhaspati and Sukra.  Again, while giving judgment about one's Karma the 10th bhava and its lord are to be taken into consideration. At the same time Ravi, vrhaspati and Sukra are to be considered as different lagnas; from those lagnas conditions of the 10th houses and their lord, are also to be examined. Furthermore, the 10th bhava is to be taken as lagna and from that lagna too the strength or weakness of the 9th and 10th houses and of their lords are to be scrutinised.

------------------------
example deleted -- page 255
------------------------
Further informations about 10th house, its lord and Ravi :

We have already told above that the 10th house indicates Father and his prosperity. In an anthropomorphical or physical sense, thigh is also indicated by Ravi. If the 10th bhava or its lord, or the natural indicator of 10th bhava, i.e. Ravi becomes unfavourable  due to  unfavourable situation (position in a house), aspect by or conjunction with malefic planets the health of the native's father may go wrong, his progress in vocational career may be thwarted, at the same time the native himself may be attacked with any kind of disease in his thigh.   If Mangal is there in the 10th house the native may be involved in any kind of accident (through fire, weapon or fall etc.) or may have painful pimples over face. Sani in the 10th house causes morbid affection of the nervous system. The native may be injured owing to fall from a tree, or high place or he may be wounded by a four-footed animal, or by a wooden log or club. If Rahu and Sani or Ravi and Sani are posited in the 10th houoe some of the nearest relatives of the native's own family may commit suicide by hanging.

Death or Parents :
When birth is at day time Sukra is indicator of mother, if it is night the indicator of mother is Chandra. So, if Sukra is aspected by or is in conjunction with malefic planets the mother of the native may die a premature death when the birth takes place at day time. Similarly Chandra under the above circumstance may kill the mother if the birth is at night. Only on the basis of these rules the native's mother's death should not be prophesied. Mother cannot die if she has long or comparatively good medium life. In such cases she may fall badly ill.

If Ravi is posited in the 10th place from lagna and is aspected by Sani and Rahu;  or if Ravi or Sani  being in the 8th house is aspected by Mangal death of the father is possible.

Following planetary configuration may be the cause of father's death :
(a) If the subject is born at night, and Sani and Mangal are posited in the 7th place from Ravi; or
(b)  Ravi  while  associated  with  mangal IS aspected by Sani; or
(c) Sani and Mangal are conjoined together and are aspected by Ravi; or
(d) When Ravi is hemmed in between two malefics, or the is associated with a malefic, and from Ravi the 7th place is occupied by any other malefic planet.

Earning of Money :
(a) If both the lagna and the 10th house are owned by one and the same planet (in case of Kanya & Mina lagnas it is possible) or the lords of lagna and the 10th house are posited in one and the same rasi the native earns good amount of money by dint of honest labour.
(b) If lords of lagna and the 10th house are conjoined with each other the native earns money with the help of a Sudra (low caste man).
(c) If the above two lords are in conjunction with Rahu (ascending node) or Ketu (descending node) the subject earns money with the help of a Mlechha (a man who is not a Hindu and at the same time is considered to be a non-believer in Vedas).
(d) If the aforesaid lords are associated with vrhaspati the native is favoured with employment by the king of the land, earns good money and holds a respectable status in society.

Position, distinction in Social life and in professional career:
1. If the 10th lords of these trio viz., Lagna, Ravi and Chandra are strong and related to each other favourably, they give beneficial result during their dasa-antardasas in the following manner:
(1a) The native may earn good amount of money, or may prosper in his vocational career.
(1b) he attains distinctive position in his profession or vocation, or
(c) he attains respectable status in society.
2. If Ravi in the 10th place is exalted, or is in his mooltrikona house the native attains high status in his professional career and also in society by dint of his merit and efficiency.
3. If lagna, dhana (2nd place) and the 11th houses are occupied by strong beneficial planets the native thrives well financially and leads a happy life. These good results may occur during the dasa-antardasas of those planets.

Means of livelihood or nature of profession :

Determination of the means of livelihood is as may be expected, the most common hurdle that an astrologer has to take. The effects of planets and houses have been set forth in detail in various books on astrology but in actual practice it is not easy to reach a definite finding. With the advancement of Science immense scope of various types of professions have opened to the people. We may classify them as far as practicable in the following manner :
1. Intelligentsia class: lawyer, professor, teacher, priest, philosopher, judge, attorney, astrologer, astronomer, psychoanalyst etc.
2. Profession  regarding Economics & Finance : Banker, Auditor, Insurance worker, Financial adviser etc.
3. Profession relating to Fine Arts etc, : Musician, actor, dancer, dramatist, painter, poet, story or fiction writer, etc.
4. Profession relating to machineries, industry, factory, electricity and other technical works etc, : Engineer, Mechanic, Industrialist, Manufacturer, Organiser of Electrical works.
5. Profession of a physician, doctor, surgeon etc.
6. Besides there are innumerable professions such as horticulturist, clerks, servants in a shop, day labourers, etc.
7. Military men and police etc.

Now, Budha and vrhaspati are the two planets that principally indicate Intelligentsia class. Sukra controls art, artistic talent, acting, music, drama and dramatist, painting, poetry-writing, physician, Engineer. Again, Budha indicates clerkship, business, education. vrhaspati also stands for education, so also Sukra. Sani's indications are analytical work, day labourer, labourer in general. Rahu and Ketu generally indicate clerkship, conventional work etc. Mangal stands for soldier, police, surgeon, archaeologist, geologist, etc. It is clear to our intelligent readers that the list of profesaions as said above is incomplete, we simply give an idea about the manner of classifications and indication of some professions ruled by different planets.

We again draw the attention of our readers about some other important points to enable them to judge the Karma bhava and 'Profession of a native.
(a) Whether the 10th house is occupied by any planet.
(b) Whether the 10th house is aspected by any planet or remains unaspected.
(c)  Whether there is more than one planet in the 10th house.

1. If the 10th house is occupied by any planet we shall have to find out the Navamsa lord of that planet occupying the 10th place.  Now, the stronger of these two planets (i.e. the planet that occupies the 10th place and his Navamsa lord will be the indicator of native's profession.
2. If the 10th place remains unoccupied by any planet the stronger one between the 10th lord and his Navamsa-lord will indicate the profession of the native.
3. If the 10th place is occupied by two or more than two planets and they are equally strong then the native may pursue more than one profession.

Strength of a planet is to be judged according to positional and directional strength, strength of aspect and also strength acquired through different vargas. There are different opinions of different schools of thought. No one class of astrologers agree with another. Commonly Prevalent and almost dependable opinions of eminent persons are related herebelow. On the basis of these rules our readers may experiment them and find out satisfactory solutions.

Besides  the rules explained  earlier  in  this chapter the followini rules should also be applied. We give below some of the rules.
1. The strongest planet among Ravi, Chandra and Lagnapathi will denote the nature of profession of the native.
2. Strongest Navamsa lord of Ravi, Chandra and Lagna may indicate one's profession.
3. We shall have to find out the strongest planet among lords of the 10th house from Ravi, Chandra and Lagna. Then the  Navamsa lord of that planet will indicate the profession of the subject. These rules are approved to be a dependable by majority of astrologers
4. Further it is said by astrologer& of high reputation that if Ravi and Chandra are situated in lagna the Navamsa lord of the Karmapathi (i.e. the lord of the 10th house from lagna) will be a determining factor in matter of profession.
5. Another opinion supported by majority of astrologers : Find out the Navamsa lords of Ravi, Chandra and lagna. The strongest of these planets, in their dasa-antardasa will give the clue about one's profession.	If all the Navamsa lords are equally strong the native may undertake the vocation indicated by all of them during their dasa and antardasas. The weakest planet of these three Navamsa lords if adversely influenced by any malefic the native shall sustain monetary loss, and that weak planet will not signifiy any profession at all. There is a very important point which should not be overlooked. If the birth chart does not show any yoga for change of profession or vocational career it is hardly believable that the strongest or equally strong planets referred to above will help the native pursue any new profession of that indicator planet. Our experience is that where there are signs of changes (in the birth chart) in a vocational career the native earns money through the profession indicated by that or those planets during their dasa-antardasas. Even lords of the 2nd, 7th, 11th and other Kendra and Kona houses, if favourably disposed will give the same result.
6. Eminent astrologers are of opinion that planets forming specially favourable yogas (such as Raja yoga, Dhana yoga) and also the planets related to those favourable yogas will signify the nature of nativc's career. Let us take an instance of 'Adhi yoga', a very favourable yoga that makes a man highly prosperous. The  subject who is born under this yoga may rise to a very high position both socially, politically and professionally.  The yoga is formed by favourable Budha, vrhaspati and Sukra being in the 6th, 7th or 8th separately or together from Chandra or lagna. The first one is called Chandradhi yoga and latter one is Lagnadhi yoga.  This yoga is found in the birth chart of Late Dr. Rajendra Prasad, the first President of Indian Union, There are some other important favourable yogas sucln as Sunapha and Anapha yogas. These yogas will be discussed elaborately later on. The planets forming ,hese yogas will help the native choose his vocational career according to their significations.

Descriptions of planetary combinations and indications of vocation are briefly described herebelow :

(a) When favourable Mangal and vrhaspati are combined together or related to each other by aspect or exchange of places the native holds a very respectable post in police Department, or as Mangal is one of the yogakarakas he may bold a high office in military organisation too.
(b) If Mangal and Budha are related in the same manner the native may be a mathematician.
(c) If yogakaraka planets are Ravi and Budha and they are strong the subject may be a good lawyer, Advocate or Barrister, Attorney or Accountant.
(d) If favourable yoga is formed by Budha and Sukra the native may be an Engineer, Medical practitioner, a succesful Chemist of great repute.
(e) Combination of Budha and favourable Sani makes the native a responsible officer in any chemical iustitution.
(f) Relation between Chandra and vrhaspati is a specially beneficial yoga that gives the native a chance to become king's minister, a great educationist, a noted officer in any Govern mental department and famous politician.
(g) Due to combination of Chandra, Budha and Sukra the subject may be a literary person, a journalist, poet or an artist.
(h) Again, combination of Ravi, Budha and Sukra makes a man a great artist, a renowned poet, and an illustrious writer. 
(i) Relation between Sukra and Budha is a powerful yoga that makes the native a successful Engineer, a very good photographer or a contractor.
 (j) Relation between Chandra and Sukra is also an equally good yoga that makes the native a successful actor, dramatist or a cinema director.

This is also to be remembered that planets, Rasi and Nakshatra all of them have different roles in deciding the nature of profession and prediction will be accurate if the learned astrologer makes proper cohesion of the qualities of these trio.

Occupation of 10th lord in different bhavas and results thereof :
10th lord in 1st  house - If  the lord of the 10th house (Karmapathi) is situated in lagna the native may be sickly in his childhood, at young age, he will be healthy and by and by he will be prosperous.
10th lord in 2nd,  3rd  &  7th  houses - The  native  will be meritorious,efficient, a good speaker and truthful.
10th lord in 4th house - The native will be learned and wise, valorous, devoted to gods, pious and may be favoured by king.
5th & 11th houses - The native will be always cheerful; he will be truthful, happy and rich and may be blessed with sons.
10th lord in 6th & 12th houses - The native may suffer much due to activities of enemies, may be cunning and be seldom happy.
10th lord in 8th house - The nativ will be cunning, wicked, a thief, a liar and may torture his mother.
10th lord in 9th house - The native will be lucky, educated, wealthy and longlived.
10th lord in 10th  house - The  native  will  be  financially  very affluent, prosperous, honourable and may make name end fame.


Eleventh house (Aya bhava)

Eleventh house signifies gain in every way, all kinds of receipts, acquisition of gold and wealth, paternal prosperity, eldest brother or sister, paternal uncle, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, brother-in-law ( sister-in-law too), knee, shank, ear, skill in practical arts etc. Difference between aya (11th) and dhana (2nd) bhavas is, from the 11th house we know whether income is easy or not, how or in what manner - honest or dishonest the native shall earn money. All these are to be found out from the 11th bhava. Dhana bhava indicates amount of income, accumulation of wealth; source of income can be determined from dhana and Aya bhavas. Both the bhavas are complementary to each other. If the dhana bkava or its lord is afflicted due to aspect or conjunction of malefic planet gain of money will not be easy, there must be some sort of difficulties in earning, so also the case with the 11th bhava.  Thorough  judgment of aya  bhava  is to be made according to instructions noted in case of other bhavas. At the present time material values or to put it more directly, money values, the profit-and-loss nexus rules out nearly every other value. This in itself is the result of planetary evolution; but into cosmic scheme, we do not pretend to enter. The day-to-day effects are however concretely appreciable, for they affect us at every step. And eminent astrologers reinforce their theoretical inferences and conclusions by references to experience when they assert that the malefic, so called have the power of bestowing on the native much greater wealth and importance to a very much greater extent than the so called benefic planets. The latter might have been more powerful in their own time, the Golden Age ; but now the Ages of lead and evil ones are more powerful. Not that benefics utterly fail to redeem their promises in terms of money and influences, but the native gets only the irreducible minimum from them and hardly more. The malefics on the other hand, if they are well-placed, that is, in giving mood, usually give a lot more than the benefics do in money and influence.

Occupation of the lord of 11th house In different bhavas and results thereof:

1. If the lord of the 11th house occupy lagna the native becomes pious, generous, joyful, good orator and a valorous person. But he may be short lived.
2. If the 11th lord is posited either in the 2nd or 3rd house the native visits holy places.  He is tactful, generous and highly expensive and may suffer from any kind of colic pain.
3. If the 11th lord occupies 4th or 5th house the native attains success in all his endeavours, he is blessed with sons and leads a happy life but he may be an impious man.
4. If the 11th lord is situated in the 6th, place the native is sickly, lives in a foreign land, often troubled by enemies, and is a humble servant of others.
5. If the lord of the 11th place is in the  7th or 8th house the native may have many virtues, he is active and noble minded. His wife dies a premature death or he has no peace in conjugal life. This is particularly true if in the birth chart of a Kanya  lagna jataka Chandra (11th lord) is situated in the 7th place
6. When the 11th lord is posited in the 9th or 10th place the native is honoured by the king of the land. He is intelligent, clever, truthful, wealthy and always sticks to his own religious belief.
7. If the 11th lord is situated in the 11th place the native becomes an orator, a poet and a learned man.
8. If the lord of the 11th house be in the 12th place the native likes the company of followers of different religion.  He is lascivious, debauch and poor.

Twelftb house (Vyaya bhava)

Twelfth house signifies expenditure, monetary loss, debt, punishment pronounced by lawful court, enjoyment and sufferinr, information about enemy, bedroom enjoyment, expenditure for just cause, salvation etc.

1. A benefic planet occupying the 12th place makes the native live happily, he earns name and fame, he spends money for just cause.
2. Ketu in the 12th is the cause of salvation.
3. Sani, Ravi and Mangal being in the 12th make the native extravagant. He seldom enjoys material happiness, may not get family peace, and there is chance of his suffering from various ailments including disease in anus and eye.
4. If the 12th bhava falls in a movable sign (rasi) and swift moving planets or lords of dusthanas (6th, 8th and 12th places) are there or the bhava is conjoined with or aspected by Sani the native aimlessly travels over forests and many countries.
5. If Sani and Rahu are in the 12th and aspected by a benefic planet the native earns money by dishonest means. The native may be involved in an accident through fire, may suffer from boils and disease in ears or left leg, particularly if Mangal is posited in the 12th house.
6. If Chandra be in the 12th place there is chance of drowning.
7. If Ravi and mangal be in the 12th place there is chance of accident through fire.
8. If Sukra be in the 12th place there is chance of courting insult due to illegal association with other's wife. But Sukra in the 12th place makes a man prosperous,
9. If Budha  be in the 12th place there is chance of loss of money due to activities of enemies.
10. When a powerful malefic be posited in the 12th place the native rules over his enemies.
11. When a powerful planet owning any dusthana, viz., 6th, 8th or 12th house is posited in the 12th place the native prospers in life.


Occupation of the 12th lord in different bhavas and results thereof:

1. If the 12th lord be in lagna or 7th place the native's relation with his wife may not be cordial, or he may lead the life of a bachelor. He may be handsom, sickly, may be suffering from disease of cough and cold and is bereft of education and money.
2. If the 12th lord be in the 2nd or 8th place the native is truthful, sweet-tongued and extravagant and he has many virtues and is devoted to Lord Vishnu.
3. If the lords of lagna and  the 12th place together and posited in the 2nd the native develops an extravagant habit due to which he may be involved in debt.
4. When the lord of the 12th place be posited in the 3rd or 9th house the native may be hostile to his wife and is miserly.
5. If the lord of the 12th be in the 10th or 11th house the native's relation with his sons is not cordial and his earning is comparatively small.
6. If the same lord, 12th, be posited in the 6th or 12th place the  native wishes his mother's premature death, he is a sinful mar.. and a debauch.

chapter-X
Beneficial planets according to different Lagna

We have already discussed about peculiarities of Nakshatras (constellation) and planets. We have also seen that each planet signifies many things. To judge a birthchart we must be thoroughly acquainted with signification ( karakata ) of each planet. 

Let us take an example : Ravi is a natural significator of Karma (action), vocation, father etc. vrhaspati signifies learning, intellect, children etc. and so on. If these planets are afflicted their virtues may be lost for the native or if they are well disposed and strong the native will be endowed with qualities of those planets. Maharshi Parasara has introduced a new chapter to show that a planet under certain conditions may be a karaka (significator) of another if both of them are in kendra from each other and also from lagna.  But to produce result of the  karaka planet both of them should be placed in their own, exalted, mooltrikona or friendly house. Say, vrhaspati is in Karkata, Sani in Tula, Mangal in makara, Ravi in Mesa and Lagna in Karkata. Each of them is in his exalted house and is in Kendra from Lagna. They are also co-related by being placed in Kendra from each other. Therefore each of them will signify each other qualities in their dasa and antardasa. Such as, though Sani is the 8th lord and vrhaspati the lord of the 9th the native will be lucky and prosperous during Sani's antardasa under the major dasa of vrhaspati. Here Sani's karakata is identical with that of Vrha1pathi.  It means Sani will produce the result of vrhaspati in vrhaspati  Sani's dasa-antardasa. Similar is the case with Mangal and Sani, and Ravi and Mangal.

Kendra and Kona : Of the 4 kendras (viz., lagna, 4th, 7th and 10th places from lagna) 4th place is stronger than lagna, 7th is stronger than the 4th, and the 10th is stronger than the 7th bhava. So, a planet in the 10th place from lagna will be most effective among other planets in any other kendra,


Benefic or malefic bhavas and their lords :

1. The 5th and the 9th bhavas are specially called 'dhanasthanas' (wealth giving bhavas) and the 4th and the 10th bhavas are 'Sukha-sthanas' (sukha=happiness,sukha-sthana means place of happiness). These four bhavas (5th, 9th, 4th and 10th) are favourable. Lagna is both kendra and kona. It is not as powerful as any one of those kendra-kona houses and the 7th bhava being a marakasthana (death inflicting bhava) is not very favourable.
2. The 2nd and the 7th bhavas are called maraka-sthana (death inflicting bhavas) and so lords of those places are taken as marakas. Excepting Ravi and Chandra all other planets may bring about death of a native. Rahu and Ketu, and also lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th can be marakas. If Ravi and Chandra are related to any other maraka planet by combination, conjunction and aspect they may act as death inflicting planets.
3. Natural benefic planets when own any kendra are taken to be unfavourable and natural malefics also will be considered as inauspicious if they are lords of any kendra. The author of Laghu Parasari (or Ududaya Pradip) says that natural malefics owning kendra are beneficial. Regarding natural benefics the author supports Parasari Hora.
(a)Natural benefics - vrhaspati, Sukra, Budha and waxing Moon.
(b)Natural malefics - Ravi, Mangal, Sani, Rahu, Ketu and waning Moon. 
(c)Budha is malefic when conjoined with other malefies.

4. The lords of the 2nd and 12th houses are called 'Para-tantras' (meaning their good or evil effect is subject to their position in favourable or unfavourable bhavas or relation with other benefic or unfavourable planets).
5. The lords of the 3rd, 6th and 11th bhavas and also the 8th lord are inauspicious planets.
6. The lords of the 2nd and 7th houses are marakas.  Of these two 7th lord is a more powerful maraka than the 2nd lord. According to Laghu Parasari 2nd lord as a maraka is more powerful than the lord of the 7th.

It is said that the lords of the 2nd and 12th houses are 'para-tantras'. Let us elaborate this version by citing an example. Say, 2nd lord associated with the lord of the 9th or 10th house will give good result ; on the other hand if be is associated with an unfavourable planet or is posited in any inauspicious house the result will be bad.

7. Natural beneficial planets become malefic if they own 3rd, 5th or 11th house. The lords of these three houses are called "Trisadayadhipathi" ('tri' means three, 'Sada' means six, 'Aya' means Eleventh).  Of these trio 11th is the worst, 6th worse and the 3rd is bad.
8. Eighth house is the twelfth place from the house of luck (i.e. 9th house). Hence the 8th lord is inauspicious but if he is the lord of lagna he will not be considered very unfavourable. It is so in case of Mesa lagna. Mangal is the lord of lagna and 8th place and he is not considered as an unfavourable planet. But in case of Sukra of Tula lagna, who is also the lord of the 8th house was not directly declared as a papa in Parasarl Hora but commentators are of opinion that Sukra of Tula lagna is not favourable.    However, of the natural benefics owning any kendra vrhaspati is the most powerful papa, next is Sukra; next to Sukra is Budha and Chandra's fault as a papa is negligible or very less.
9. Therefore, if vrhaspati being the lord of a kendra is also the lord of any maraka-sthan ( 2nd or 7th place ) his death inflicting power is the highest and next is Sukra. Budha as a
maraka is less powerful in comparison to vrhaspati and Sukra.
10. The planet - be he a natural benefic or malefic, will be considered as inauspicious if he is the lord of a kendra and at the same time owns any one of the 3rd, 6th and 11th houses.
11. The lord of the 9th even if he is a natural malefic or lord of any dusthana (6th, 8th and 12th places) is deemed to be favourable.
   
We shall see later on that of mithuna lagna Sani the lord of the 8th and 9th houses is not considered all good and his relation with the 10th lord vrhaspati will not produce Rajayoga.
Similarly in case of Simha lagna vrhaspati being the lord of 5th (another 'kona') and 8th houses will not form any Rajayoga owing to his 8th lordship.

Sthirakaraka: Sthira-karaka means under all circumstances karaka(a ascribed to each planet is fixed. This has been elaborated by Maharshi Parasara in the following manner:
Between Ravi and Sukra the stronger one is Pitrikaraka (signifies father).
Between Chandra and Mangal the stronger one is Matrikaraka (signifies mother).
Now there is a special significance of each planet and bhava according to the situation of that planet as a bhava-lord under consideration. Let us explain :-
(i) Specially Chandra denotes mother and 4th bhava from Chandra also signifies mother.
(ii) Ravi is an indicator of father and also the 9th place from Ravi signifies father.
(iii) Mangal denotes sister and brother and also brother of the native's wife and the 3rd bhava from Mangal indicates brother etc.
(iv) Budha denotes maternal uncle, mother's sister, wife of father's younger brother, wife of maternal uncle, stepmother etc. and the 6th bhava from Budha signifies maternal uncle etc.
(v) vrhaspati signifies son and daughter, master, grandfather and 5th bhava from vrhaspati denotes children.
(vi) Sukra denotes wife, parents, maternal grandmother etc and also the 7th bhava from Sukra indicates wife.  (Sukra's sthirakarakata denoting parents and maternal grandmother sounds queer to us.)
(vii) The 8th bhava from Sani indicates death
The 'Karakata' noted above is to be considered specially in judging a horoscope and also Astha Varga chakras.

Mesa Lagna : Sani being the lord of the 10th and 11th houses is unfavourable and is considered as a bhadhak planet (planet of obstruction). Budha being the lord of the 6th house and Sukra a natural benefic being lord of the 7th house (a kendra) are unfavourable. Ravi is a benefic. Nothing has been said about Chandra and Mangal. Chandra is considered as ksheena (lean) after 8th day from the beginning of the day of the new moon. So Chandra being the lord of the 4th house from Mesa will be considered as favourable if she is ksheena (lean or waning moon), and Chandra of the bright half owning a kendra will be unfavourable. Mangal though the lord of the 8th place will not be unfavourable as he is the lord of (Mesa) lagna. vrhaspati is the lord of the 9th and 12th places. As he is the lord of the 12th place, his good effect depends on some conditions in spite of 9th lordship. He will be beneficially effective if he is related to any other favourable planet. Sukra is the principal maraka (death inflicting planet) on account of his ownership of the 2nd and 7th places. If any other malefic planet occupies any marakasthan (death denoting place such as 2nd, 7th, 8th places etc.) or any malefic is related to Sukra that planet will also be a maraka. The author of Bhavartha Ratnakara, a very old but short treatise on astrology is of opinion that Sukra being the lord of the 2nd and 7th places cannot himself be a maraka (death inflicting planet) until and unless he is conjoined with other unfavourable planets such as Sani and Budha.  This opinion is not supported by Parasari Hora.

Vrsa Lagna : vrhaspati, Sukra and Chandra  are  papas (malefics).	Ravi and Sani are favourable. Sani being lord of 9th and 10th himself alone is a Rajayogakaraka planet. vrhaspati is capable of inflicting death if he is posited in the 2nd or 7th place or is related to the lord of the 2nd or 7th houses. As Mangal is the lord of the 7th house his capability of inflicting death should be stronger than any other malefic.  But there is no remark about Mangal in Parasari Hora. Maharshi Parasara did not also mention any thing about budha. Ududhaya Pradipa (or Laghu Parasari) mentioned that Budha is a paratantra (subservient to some condition) as he owns the 2nd place and he too may be a maraka if he is related to any other maraka planet. This is supported by many commentators. Experienced astrologers of wide reputation are of opinion that though Sani is the lord of the 9th and 10th does not produce favourable result until and unless he is conjoined with any other yogakaraka or favourable planet, or unless he is situated in the 10th place from lagna. If he is in the 2nd place the native no doubt becomes financially affluent and popular, but in the long run Sani ruins the native financially and he becomes isolated from his near and dear ones. According to Bhavartha Ratnakara dhanayoga is caused by combination of vrhaspati and Budha, but this yoga will be defunct if Mangal joins or aspects them.

Mithuna Lagna : Ravi, Mangal and vrhaspati are papas. Only benelic planet is Sukra being the lord of the 5th. Relation between vrhaspati, the lord of the 7th as well as 10th and Sani the lord of the 8th and 9th houses will not produce any Rajayoga until any other benefic planet joins them by aspect or combination in which case Raja yoga will be effective. Chandra the lord of the 2nd is not capable of inflicting death unless some other papa planet is related to Chandra. According to Bhavartha Ratnakara a brilliant dhanayoga will be caused when Chandra and Mangal together are posited in the 11th and Sani in the 9th place from Lagna. The author stresses much importance on the combination of Sukra, Chandra and Mangal being in the 2nd and is of opinion that the native becomes a wealthy man during Sukra dasa. Neither in Parasari Hora nor Ududhaya Pradipa ( Laghu Piiriisari ) there is any remark about Budha.

Karkata Lagna : Sukra and Budha are malefic planets, and Mangal and vrhaspati are benefics. Mangal alone is a Rajayogakaraka planet but he himself alone is not capable of yielding favourable result unless he is related to any other favourable planet. vrhaspati is the lord of the 6th but the fault due to the 6th house-lordship is not taken into consideration as he is also the lord of the 9th place. Sani is the principal marak on account of his ownership of 7th and 8th houses. Other malefic planets also can be marakas if they are related to Sani.    As vrhaspati is the lord of both 6th and 9th houses he shall give mixed result during his dasa. Some astrological savants are of opinion that in case of Karkata Lagna if vrhaspati is in Lagna, Ravi in the 10th and Budha and Sukra are seated in the 11th place the native becomes a famous king of good moral character. The yoga is termed as 'Maharajayoga' in Brihata-Jataka.  Though Sukra and Budha are said to be malefic some astrologers of high order say that Karkata-Lagna-Jataka becomes very rich during Sukra-dasa if Sukra and Budha are positcd in the 12th house. Similarly they are of opinion that Rajayoga is caused if Chandra and vrhaspati are posited in lagna.

Simha Lagna : Sukra and Budha are unfavourable. They become marakas if related to other papas.  Mangal and vrhaspati are beneficial planets. Relation between vrhaspati (5th lord) and Sukra (10th lord) does not cause Rajayoga because Sukra is the lord of the 3rd and vrhaspati the lord of the 8th. If other favourable planet is related to Sukra and vrhaspati Rajayoga result is expected. Chandra will give favourable result if she is related to any beneficial planet and the result will be bad if she is related to any unfavourable planet. According to Parasari Hora Sani being the lord of the 7th is the most powerful maraka but according to Laghu Parasari Budha as a death inflicting planet is stronger than any other maraka. Nothing has been said about Ravi.

Kanya Lagna : Mangal, vrhaspati and Chandra are papas. Sukra alone is favourable and relation between Sukra and Budha will cause Rajayoga. Sukra is a maraka and next to Sukra death inflicting planet is Mangal. It is surprising that vrhaspati's ownership of two kendras of which one is the 7th house bas been overlooked by Maharshi Parasara and he is not declared as a maraka. Even he is not placed in the second category of marakas. No commentators thought it right to discuss this point. However, experience shows Sukra being the principal maraka cannot give favourable result in spite of his lordship of the 9th, during his dasa - particularly his antardasa under the major dasa of any other papa planet. During such dasa and antardasa Sukra may do immense mischief to the native in many respects. Relation between Sukra, the 9th lord and vrhaspati, the 4th lord and their positions in the 2nd houae will not cause any dhana-yoga. Shri B. V. Raman a very eminent astrologer in India in his comment said, " ... in actnal practice it is found that Venus dasa will be more beneficial than that of Jupiter because Jupiter becomes afflicted, being lord of a kendra." vrhaspati's fault as a lord of two kendras is no doubt great but Sukra's death inflicting effect is no less iimportant.
-----------------------
example deleted
-----------------------
Tula  Lagna : vrhaspati,  Ravi  and  Mangal  are  papas. Relation between Chandra and Budha causes powerful Rajayoga, Sani being the lord of the 4th and the 5th is Rajayoga-karaka and Budha as the lord of the 9th is favourable. Sukra is not a maaraka but not favourable owing to ownership of the 8th house. vrhaspati is the lord of the 3rd and the 6th house. If he is situated in Lagna he does not permit the native to pass a single day peacefully due to this or that ailment. I have seen number of horoscopes where vrhaspati is posited in Tula lagna and the native almost everyday complains of this or that disease, sometimes minor and at other times very troublesome. Maharshi Parasara said, "Of Tula Lagna vrhaspati is a 'khala' (meaning wicked.  This is exactly what I saw in many cases." For this Lagna Mangal being the lord of the 2nd and 7th is a maraka. But if Ravi, Budha and Sani are related to Mangal either by combination or mutual aspect Mangal will be favourable to the native. Again, combination of Ravi, Budha and Sani with Chandra will do immense good to the native. This is also to be noted that vrhaspati also may be a maraka if related to maraka planets or posited in a malefic house.

Vrscika  Lagna : Budha,  Mangal  and  Sukra  are malefics. vrhaspati being the 2nd and 5th lord and Chandra the lord of the 9th house are benefic planets. Rajayoga is caused by the relation between Ravi and Chandra. According to Parasari Hora Budha, Mangal and Sukra are marakas. But Laghu Parasari's version is that vrhaspati is the principal maraka and Budha and other papa planets also may be death-inflicting under certain circumslance. Maharsbi Parasara said in the chapter dealing in longivity that Rahu is considered the principal maraka in case of Vrscika and makara lagnas.   Sani being the 3rd and 4th lord is no doubt unfavourable. The 3rd house is not favourable but it is a upachayasthan. Sani being a natural malefic should not be considered as unfavourable as he owns a kendra. So, Sani should not be declared as papa. Some commentators are of opinion that though strictly speaking Sani is not very unfavourable even then he can not produce good result.  Parasara and other eminent authors opine that vrhaspati is bendicial due to his 5th house ownership but our experience is that vrhaspati being a maraka gives awefully unfavourable result and makes the native stranded financially.  Of course this is also to be noted that vrhaspati gives brilliant result if he is related to any yoga karaka planet. To quote Bhavartha Ratnakara we may cite the following yoga caused by vrhaspati, Chandra and Budha. According to that treatise, 'The native will be very fortunate and rich if vrhaspati and Budha are in the 5th and Chandra in the 11th house."

Dhanu Lagna : According to Parasari Hora vrhaspati, Sukra, Sani, Budha and Chandra are malefic planets. vrhaspati due to lordship of kendra, Sani being the lord of the 2nd and the 3rd, Sukra as a lord of 6th and 11th, Budha being the lord of 7th and Chandra as lord of the 8th house are considered as papas. Sani is said to be death inflicting planet but why Budha has not been mentioned as maraka as he is the lord of the 7th is not explained. Parasara's verdict in the beginning is that 7th lord as a maraka is more powerful than the 2nd lord. Here he bas not even mentioned Budha as a maraka.  But in this respect Laghu Parasari has maintained consistency,  The author has not ever mentioned 7th lord as a maraka in preference to the 2nd lord.   According to Laghu Parasori (or Ududhaya Pradipa) the 2nd lord Sani is maraka, Ravi and budha are benefics and their relation by combination, aspect or exchange of houses etc. will produce Rajayoga. Maharshi Parasara also said, relation between these two planets will give Rajayoga effect ; also Rajayoga will be caused owing to relation between Ravi and Mangal.  Though vrhaspati being the lord of a kendra may do immense good under certain circumstance. A native having his lagna in Dhanu, vrhaspati m the 5th and Snkra in the 4th place from lagna got immensely good result during the major period of Sukra and sub-period of vrhaspati as vrhaspati being the lagna-lord is placed in the 5th and aspects lagna. In latter chapter Mabarshi said that any planet aspecting lagna will have to be deemed as Yogakaraka and lord of lagna and the 4th house being in the 5th place will produce beneficial result. So, in case of Dhanu Lagna vrhaspati should not be summarily dismissed as an evil planet.

makara Lagna : Chandra, Mangal and vrhaspati are malefics. Budha and Sukra are favourable planets. Ravi also is papa and Sani is the principal maraka. Mangal and other papas also can be maraka as and when Sani is powerful and well-disposed. In that case Sani's death inflicting power will be much minimised. Sukra being the lord of the 5th and 10th is the only Rajayoga karaka planet. Truly speaking Sukra is capable of producing Rajayoga result only when be is in the 5th house. His position in the 10th will not help the native acquire money, name and fame and vocational career of the native will be most ordinary. This is due to Sukra's ownership of a kendra. But my experienee is that when Sukra is related to any other Yogakaraka planet and is posited in the 10th he is capable of conferring Rajayoga result. According to Laghu Parasari Ravi in spite of 8th house ownership and Chandra 7th house lordship are not unfavourable. In case of makara Lagna Rahu is a powerful maraka. This was specially mentioned by Maharshi Parasara in case of Vrscika and makara Lagna.

Kumbha Lagna : Chandra, Mangal and vrhaspati are malefics. Rajayoga is caused by the relation between Sukra and Mangal. vrhaspati is the death inflicting planet, Budha and other unfavourable planets also may become marakas. Ravi and Sani are unfavourable. Sukra though the lord of the 4th and 9th may not confer Rajayoga effect if he is posited in the 4th. Though Mangal is declared as a papa relation between Mangal (10th lord) and Sukra (4th and 9th lord) will produce Rajayoga. Ravi is the lord of the 7th house. He will not be a maraka but be may be responsible for suffering of the native due to bad health.

Mina Lagna - Sani, Sukra, Ravi and Budha are unfavourable planets. Mangal and Chandra are benefics. Mangal though lord  of  the 2nd house is not a maraka.  Neither Maharshi Parasara nor author of Laghu Parasari has declared Budha as a maraka  though  he owns the 7th house.  On the other hand it is said that Sani and other unfavourable planets may be marakas. Relation  between  Mangal and  vrhaspati  will	produce Rajayoga. It is very interesting to note that though vrhaspati of Mina Lagna owns two kendras he has not been mentioned as a papa but in case of Dhanu Lagna Vrhaspa this has been classified in the same rank with other papa planets such as Sani, Sukra, Chandra and Budha. Why this differentiation was not discussed by any known commentator?

We have seen when a natural benefic acts as a malefic under special circumstances. Are we then to take it for granted that beneficient qualities of a natural Suva (favourable) planet are wiped out because of ownership of a kendra and of any of the 3rd, 6th and 11th houses ?

vrhaspati is a natural suva (favourable) planet. In case of mithuna Lagna vrhaspati's fault as a lord of kendra has been magnified by all eminent followers of Maharshi Parasara. Malefic vrhaspati occupying 10th place which is his own house is said to be unfavourable. In such case our decision should be that career of the native will be very much disturbed due to presence of a malefic planet no less important than vrhaspati. If any astrologer comes to such a conclusion it is bound to be wrong. Because good effect of a natural benefic can not be wiped out owing to his ownership of a kendra. So, in the above instance vrhaspati though has acquired fault as a kendrapathi will not be an obstructive factor in a native's career.  But his fault as a kendrapathi will be manifested during his dasa and antardasa and also during the dasa and antardasa of vrhaspati and any other malefic planets. The vocational interest of the native will be hampered at that period.

But this is also a fact that if an auspicious planet be the lord of the 6th, 8th or 12th house his malefic effect will be prominently felt by the native for all the time when the planet occupies any kendra, kona, 2nd or 11th place etc. If a planet owns both 6th and 9th houses his fault due to ownership of any dusthana (malefic bhavas) may be negligible. Brihat-jataka  has  not  enunciated  any such theory. According to that treatise lords of 6th, 8th and 12th houses as well as natural papa (malefic) planets are always inauspicious. vrhaspati, Sukra, waxing Moon and Budha when seated alone or conjoined with natural benefic are always auspicious planets. Again lords of kendra, kona are also favourable.

CHAPTER-XI
Vlmsottari Dasa and Antardasa or Bhuktl
Or Period and Sub-Period
   Dasa and antardasa is a method devised by ancient Hindu Rishies to solve the question of timing events. It is yet a moot point to us to tell our readers definitely upon what basis each planet is attached a certain number of years as its term of dasa. 'But this also we cannot deny that in actual practice "dasa and antardasa" system gives very satisfactory result in making prophecies about period of events.
----------------------------------------------
Dasa Calculation deleted
page 248 - 255
----------------------------------------------
Fundamental principles of judging dasa and antardasa in predicting events. 

It is an admitted fact that determination of timing events is really a problem to astrologers. Dasa System devised by Hindu Rishies is really a great step to solve this problem.  But though the system is there we must know many things before we venture to make any prophecy regarding period of events.  We shall give in the following paragraphs some clues which may be of much help to our readers in this matter.

Fundamental rules for determining time of nents through dasa and antardasa.  They are by no means exhaustive :

1. We know that each planet has his own significance. So, it is expected that a planet during his own dasa and antardasa will yield result good or bad according to his own significance. But actually this is not the case. A planet in his own dasa and antardasa will give his own significant results, but tempered, modified or effected by its relations with other planets by coexistence, aspecting or exchange of places. If there is none of these relations the planet during his dasa and antardasa will produce the result of such other planet as has similar characteristics with him. To cite an example let us take the case of Mangal of karkata lagna. If Mangal is not related to any other planet he will give the result of vrhaspati during his dasa and antardasa. Because Mangal is a 'Raja yoga Karaka' planet and vrhaspati is the lord of luck (9th house). Further both the planets are friendly to each other and have been classified in the same rank.
2. When dasapathi (Major dasa-lord) and antardasapathi (the lord of the subperiod) are inimical or antagonistic to each other (such as, major dasa lord is the owner of the 9th house and antardasa lord owns any malefic bhavas) the dasapathi in his dasa and antardasa of malefic planet will yield unfavourable result. In such a case we cannot expect a favourable result but if the dasa-lord is strong and favourably disposed result will not be very unfavourable.
3. If kendrapatbi (lord of kendra) or  konapathi (lord of kona) are not related to each other the result ot their dasa and antardasa will not be favorable. There are exceptions:
(i) If either of the 5th or 10th lord is not very unfavourably disposed or any one of the two is not very maliciously related to any malefic planet the dasa and antardaoa of the 5th and the 10th lord will yield good result provided the 5th lord is conjoined with the lord of the 9th house.
(ii) If the lords of the 5th and the 9th houses are conjoined with each other subperiod of 4th or 10th lord under the major period of 5th or 9tn lord will yield favourable result even if there is no relation between dasa and antardasa lords.
(iii) Antardasa of the 5th lord under the major period of the 10th lord or the dasa and antardasa of the 9th and the 4th or 4th and 9th lords will give beneficial result. Of course if these planets are related to each other the result will be very good.
(iv) The lord of the 10th house when posited in the 5th place and also when lord of the 10th house is conjoined with the 4th lord their dasa and antardasa are  beneficial to the native.
(v) If the  lords of the 5th, 10th, 4th and 9th places together occupy any bhava their dasas and antardasas are favourable. Even if the lord of any other bhav is conjoined with them the dasa and antardasa of that planet also will produce beneficial result.
4. If a  malefic is related  to any  Rajayogakaraka  planet during the antardasa of the yogakaraka planet under the major dasa of the malefic dasa-antardasa result will be favourab[e.
5. It is said in Parasariya Susloka Satakam (hundred best Slokas of Maharshi Parasara) that Sani of Mesa or mithuna lagna will not produce any Rajayoga. But according to that valuable book if a planet owns 6th and at the same time 7th house and is placed in the 10th place, from lagna and he is conjoined with any other planet his dasa and antardasa and also antardasa of that planet who is combined with the aforesaid lord of the 6th and 7th houses will produce favourable result. Sani of Simha lagna occupying Vrsa rasi will cause this yoga.
6. If one and the same planet be the owner of the 2nd and the 7th houses and occupies the 4th place from lagna his major dasa and antardasa of that planet combined with the dasapathi (lord of the major dasa) will be favourable.
7. If a lord of any dusthana (6th, 8th and 12th places) be associatcd with the 5th lord the dasa and antardasa of those planets will be favourable.
8. If the lord of the 4th is situated in the 10th and the 10th lord is in the 4th place their dasas and antardasas are favourable.
9. When the 9th lord is in the 4th and the 4th lord is situated in the 10th their dasas and antardasas are auspicious.
10. If  the  5th or the 9th lord is in the 10th place their dasas and antardasas are favourable.
11. If the lord of the antardasa is placed in the 12th place from the dasa-lord the native shall get unfavourable result during the period of antardasa lord under the major period of dasa-lord. If the lord of antardasa be the owner of 5th or 9th house the unfavourable result will be much less.
12. If the 5th and 9th places from the dasa-lord are occupiec by Sani, Mangal, Rahu, Ketu or Ravi the native suffers from mental worries and anxieties during the dasa-lord and sub-period of anyone of these natural papas. The native shall have no peace of mind. If these  natural papas  are benefic  owing to lordship of auspicious bhavas the first part of the antardasa will be bad and the last part will be favourable.
13. If the 6th, 8th or 12th place from a planet is occupied by 'Krura' planets (Mangal, Sani, Ravi, Rahu are Krura planets. 'Krura' means cruel or very malefic) or anyone of those dusthanas (6th, 8th and 12th places) is occupied by either debilitated or combust planet during the dasa of the first named planet and antardasa of any  'Krura' planet enemies of the native will be very active to pull him down or to injure his interest, and the native shall incur displeasure of the head of the state, and suffer monetary loss.
14. If the 4th place from a planet is occupied by any 'Krura' planet during the major dasa of that planet and antardasa of 'Krura' planet loss of native's house and landed properties may be apprehended.
(14-i) If Mangal occupies that 4th place there is possibility of arson, crash of thunder, sudden death of cattle, accident, or any other sudden danger.
(14-ii) If Sani is there in the 4th place the native shall suffer from heartache, pain in the chest, rheumatism, or any other disease owing to morbid affection of the nervous sys1em.
(14-iii) If weak Ravi is posited in the 4th place from that planet during the dasa and antardasa period of those planets the native shall incur royal displeasure, he shall suffer from loss of money or any other property and there is chance of disturbance in vocational career.
(14-iv) If Rahu is in the 4th place from a planet there is chance of theft of money or valuable articles, disease due to effect of any kind of poison or poisonous drug.
15. If Rahu is posited in the 10th place from a planet during dasa and antardasa of that planet and Rahu ther is chance of going on pilgrimage to holy places, of visiting foreign lands or distant countries.
(15-i) Again if the 9th, 10th or 11th place from a planet is occupied by a benefic their dasas and antardasas are favourable. The native acquires name and fame, earns money and gets education.
16. If the 5th, 6th and 7th places from a planet are occupied by an exalted or auspicious planet the native is blessed with wife, children and royal favour during their dasas and antardasas.
17. If the 4th place from a planet is occupied by an exalted planet or if that 4th house is the own or mooltrikona sign of the occupant the native possesses conveyances, builds his own house and earns good money during their dasas and antardasas.
18. If the lord of the rasi where Chandra is situated is posited in the house of exaltation and is in kendra from lagna the native shall prosper, be wealthy, gain money through  agricultural enterprise during the dasa of that exalted planet. I think, the native shall get beneficial result according 10 signification of that exalted planet.
19. If lagnapathi is in his own Navamsa, Dwadasamsa or drekkan his dasa will be favourable.
(19-i) If Navamsa lord of lagnapathi is posited in friendly navamsa, drekkan or in his own navamsa, or lagnapathi is aspected by a friendly planet wbo is posited in his own, friendly navamsa, drekkan or dwadasomsa dasa of the lagnapathi is beneficial.

A few important points should be noted carefully :-

(1) If an exalted planet crosses his highest point of exaltation at the time of birth the first part of his dasa is favourable and the latter part will not be as favourable as the first one.
(2) Similarly if a debilitated planet in the birth chart crosses the lowest point of debilitation the first of his dasa is unfavourable and the last part is favourdble.
(3) If a planet in exaltation in the birth chart is posited in the lowest point of debilitation the first part of his dasa is unfavourable strength to impart good result and gives favourable result in the beginning of the dasa and at the end the result will be unfavourable. Reverse will be the result of the dasa of a debilitated planet occupying the house of exaltation in the navamsa chakra.
(4) A planet loses bis strength if he is combust, conjoined with a papa or an enemy planet positioned in an inimical house or if he occupies any dusthana (6th, 8th or 12th house).
(5) The planet who is inimical to lagnapathi cannot give good in his dasa and antardasa of lagnapathi.  The dasa of such a planet will not be very unfavourable if he is a temporary friend to the lagnapathi.
(6) Those planets who occupy 4th, 9th or 10th place from lagnapathi cannot give favourable result if they are inimical to the lord of lagna, but if they are friendly to lagnapathi the dasa and antardasa of lagnapathi will be favourable.
(7) When two planets are situated in the 7th place from each other their dasa and antardasa will not be favourable. But in cases of 'jeeba' yoga, 'Souri-Guru' yoga, 'Guru-Vauma' yoga and Chandra being in the 7th place from Mangal or vice-versa their dasas and antardasas will produce beneficial result.
[Jeeba yoga=Chandra and Vrhaspatlti being in the 7th place from each other. Souri-Guru yoga=Sani and vrhaspati being in the 7th place from each other and Guru-Vauma yoga=vrhaspati and Mangal being in the 7th place from each other].

We have spoken very highly of Rajayogas hut this is to be remembered that a simple favourable yoga will be of no use or of less importance if yogakaraka planets do not gain strength. Their dasas and antardasas will really be productive of good results if they (yoga karaka planets) are strong and favourably disposed. We have said earlier that if the 4th lord is in the 10th and the 10th lord in the 4th the result of their dasa and antardasa will be beneficial but if those planets are aspected by lords of the 5th and 9th places this will be a very powerful Rajayoga and their dasa and antardasa will be very beneficient. Here also the planets must be strong, otherwise Rajayoga will produce medium result. Once the dasa and antardasa have  been established, the process of deciding about their effects becomes the most important matter. And in this, it is difficult to set down mechanical guide lines. One has to assess and valuate the power, the attitude, the proclivity and mood of each planet. And then the joined effect as the influences of other planets converge on the lords of the dasa and antardasa, where each is placed with reference to lagna and rasi, who aspects whom, who is friendly, who hostile and who neutral, and to what extent -- all this has to be considered not merely 'a priori', but with reference to some facts known to have actually occurred during the native's life. It is a matter also of the astrologers' own ability and experience and of largely on intuition which operates only on the subconscious of extensive and intensive reading and hard diligent work. Another point of capital importance - alas, so often forgotten -- is that the contexts of modern society, of changed social conditions, of the impact of day-to-day scientific and mechanical adjustments in daily life etc is the bed-rock on which all current and contemporary predictive astrology is based. The astrologer himself can not get away from his contemporary sheet anchor of his own life and escape to a vacuum and to make predictions in the 20th century with mechanical accuracy consistent with the shastras, but which would be apposite to the sixth and seventh century or to some such time when the shastras were written or compiled.

To take a certain example off the beat. Suppose the ancient texts lay that in a certain conjunction of planets in their dasa and antardasa the native would be afflicted by swarms of wild four or many-footed animals. Now if the predictive astrologer true to his texts and mechanically quite accurate deduces about a native who lives in a modern metropolis that he would be harassed by elephants or some such animals, he would be ridiculed and rightly. If he is a man of intelligence and experience, which are by no means ruled out by ancient texts, he might find the answer in mosquitoes. So, warning is that contemporary contexts should never be ignored.

CHAPTER-XII
Astottary Dasa and Antardasa
------------------------------------
deleted pages62 - 267
------------------------------------


CHAPTER-XIII
Judgment of dasa and antardasa according to Uttarakalamrita

Dasa of Ravi :
(i) If Ravi is strong and well-disposed the native shall be blessed with a son, there will be increase of knowledge and lntellect, prosperity, pomp and power, gain of position, status and good luck etc.
(ii) If Ravi is unfavourable due to conjunction with or aspect by malefic or if he is an owner of an inauspicious house the following results during Ravi's dasa may be expected:   Worries and anxieties, mental or physical agony, unsuccess, demotion in or dismissal from service, loss of money, illness, displeasure of the king of the land, illness of father and other unfavourable results.

Dasa of Chandra :
(i) When Chandra is benefic, strong and well-disposed the following results may he thought of, such as, affinity with and happiness of mother, digging a well or pond, acquisition of landed property, flower-gardening, blessings of brahmins, gain of wealth and happiness etc.

Dasa of Mangal :
(i) If Mangal is strong and favourably posited following results are indicated, such as : Acquisition of land, fulfilment of desire, increase of knowledge and intellect, gain of power and status, birth of a brother etc.
(ii) If Mangal is unfavourable - illness of brother and sister, creation of enemies due to misunderstanding and misbehaviour, quarrel, dispute relating to landed property, fear from fire and weapon, defective eye sight, displeasure of the king of the land, accident etc.

Dasa of Budha :
(i) When Budha is favourable and strong the following results may be expected such as - gain of wealth, knowledge, good education, honour, good relation with relatives, success upto expectation, building of house, good name in service career etc.
(ii)  If Budha is malefic and weak his dasa is not favourable. Results of his dasa are as follows : Living in a foreign land (now-a-days it is a boon to a person to have the opportunity of living in a foreign country. In ancient days it was a curse for him to live far away from his birth place), death of near and dear ones, misuse of intelligence. loss in business, inimical act of a business colleague, loss of money and landed property, worries and anxieties, miseries etc.

Dasa of vrhaspati :
(i) If vrhaspati is strong and favourably disposed the results of his dasa will be as follows :  A leader of a village or city, may be first rate leader in the country, development of religious inclination, intellectual yearning, gain of wealth. name and fame, devotion to Brahmin and God etc.
(ii) If vrhaspati is weak and  unfavourable his dasa will indicate the following : to incur king's displeasure, mental agony, enmity of Brahmins, monetary stringency, dispute with father, disease of consumption or phthisis etc.

Dasa of Sukra :
(i) When she is favourable and strong good luck, gain of high position and status, gain of wealth in kind or coin, an attempt to establish in a higher position among religious Pandits, an expert in many kinds of arts, to perform successfully a ceremonious festival, culture of music etc.
(ii) If Sukra is unfavourable : to be guided by wicked intellect, loss of money and property, to be addicted to carnal pleasure, to be a man of loose morals, to be addicted to wine and women, secret disease, to visit brothel etc.

Dasa of Sani :
(i) If Sani is favourable and strong : to do sacrificial rites. increase of happiness, to be prosperous, abundance of wealth, increase of wealth by skilful means in business, gain of leadership among common men etc.
(ii) If Sani is unfavourable his dasa will prove notorioualy evil, 1uch as : ill health owing to attack of various sorts of diseases, liking for prohibited works, suffering from rheumatism or gout, loss of money, mental agony etc.

Dasa of Rahu :
(i)  When Rahu is favourable and strong - all round progress, to get an exalted position in service, to attain spiritual knowledge, increase of power and authority etc.
(ii) If Rahu is unfavourable - fear from snake and four-footed animal, weapon and fire, to be troubled by enemies, loss of money etc.

Dasa of Ketu :
(i) When ketu is favourable - gain of money through works fraught with danger or beset with difficulties, increase of fortune with the help of a king of a foreign country, development of poetic faculties etc.
(ii) If ketu is unfavourable - to be involved in danger, unsuccess in all endeavours, to be attacked with rheumatic disease, heartache, heart-throbbing, tremoring sensation throughout the whole body, disagreement with Brahmins, to foil down any work through mistake etc.

Special rules for dasas of Rahu and Ketu :
1. If Rahu or Ketu is posited in any Trikonasthana [5th or 9th house from lagna) and is associated with or aspected by the lord of the 2nd or 7th house their dasas may be considered as marakas (death-inflicting).
2. On the other hand if any of those planets is situated in the 2nd or 7th house and aspected by or conjoined with 5th or 9th lord Rahu or Ketu may bestow long life and good wealth.    But if the 2nd or the 9th lord is associated with any natural malefic death of the native during the dasa of Rahu or Ketu is possible. Some commentators are of opinion that if Rahu or Ketu occupying any of those trikona houses and the lord of that trikona house is conjoined with any natural malefic, in that case also death-inflicting effect of the dasa of Rahu or Ketu is possible.
3. If Rahu and Ketu are posited in a dual Rasi and also the lord of that dual sign or Rahu and Ketu are associated with a lord of kendra or kona then during dasa period of the lord of kendra or kona the native may earn name and fame, gain much wealth, pomp and power.
4. If these two planets (Rahu and Ketu) or lords of the houses where they are posited are associated with the lord of kendra or kona and at the same time they are aspected by the lord of the 6th, 8th or 12th house the native will not get any good result indicated above, on the other hand, death may overtake his mother or any one of her relatives.
5. If these two planets are posited in chara (movable) or sthira (fixed) Rasi and are related to the lord of kendra or kona their dasa will produce good luck, but if they are placed in any dusthana (6th, 8th or 12th house) or in a malefic house their dasa will not be productive of favourable results; but there are a few learned astrologers who are of opinion that under that circumstance also the native shall get favourable results. Other commentators say that Rahu and Ketu being in unfavourable houses will endanger the life of the native, even if they are associated with a natural benefic.
6. If these planets are seated in any dusthana (6th, 8th or 12th house) and are conjoined with or aspected by the lord of that dusthana their dasas are very very unfavourable.
(6-i) Again if these planets be posited in any dusthana and are aspected by or conjoined with any maraka planet they may be treated as death inflicting.
(6-ii) If they being in any dusthana are related to a lord of kendra or kona undoubtedly their dasas will be productive of some good results, but ultimately their dasas will prove very unfavourable for the native. He may be involved into accident, may be wounded by a weapon or may be drowned or he may commit suicide or may pass through miseraole days.
7. If Rahu and Ketu being strong occupy a bhava and establish relation with that bhava-lord or if they are related to any other bhava lord they will produce the result of that planet with which they are connected. The intensity of such result depends on the strength or weakness of that planet with which they are connected. They will not be influenced by any other plauet.


A few more instructions about judgment  of dasa :-

8. While explaining the results of dasa and bhukti of twc, planets Uttarakalamrita codifies a few rules. They are as follows :
(8-i) It is imperative for an astrologer to see the positions of the lords of dasa and antardasa from lagna.
(8-ii) Their strength must be ascertained (strength means sthana-bala, dik-bala, dristhi-bala) and relation between dasa and antardasa lords and also their relation with other planets must be looked into.
(8-iii) After judging all these things next thing is to see whether dasa and antardasa lords are posited in kendra from each other. If so, the results of dasa &nd antardasa will be favourable provided they do not own any dusthana.
(8-iv) The bhava i.e. the house where dasa and antardasa-lord are situated should be taken as lagna. From that position the astrologer is to see the nature of results they will give. Further it is to be examined whether the planets are capable of imparting those results at all, this may be determined according to their atrength, association with or aspect by other planets. Moreover relation between dasa and antardasa-lords are also to be considered.
9. If dasa and antardasa lords do not own any dusthana or are not situated in any unfavourable place from lagna their dasa and antardasa give favourable result provided both of them are placed in kendra or kona position from each other.
(9-i) If they are placed in the 2nd, 3rd or 11th place from each other their dasa and antardasa will be fairly good and if they are in the 6th and 8th places from each other no beneficial result should be expected.
10.  If  the  lord of antardasa is placed in the 6th, 8th or 12th place from dasa-lord the former is to be considered as enemy to the latter.
(10-i) If the antardasa-lord is posited in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 9th. 10th and 11th place from the dasa-lord the antardasa lord gives maximum good result.
(10-ii) If  the lord of dasa owns a malefic house and does not associate with a benefic antardasa-lord the result of their dasa and antardasa is unfavourable.
(10-iii) If both of them are malefic and be.seated to1etber results of their dasa and antardasa are unfavourable.
(10-iv) The antardasa result will be unfavourable even if the lord of the antardasa is rajayogakaraka but not conjoined with any benefic dasa-lord.
(10-v) If the lord of major dasa is rajayogakaraka and at the same time a 'maraka' the first part of his antardasa yields good result and the second part gives almost death-inflicting result.
11. When dasa-lord is rajayogakaraka and antardasa-lord though malefic is favourable owing to position, aspect, association and in various other considerations he is strong and yogakaraka antardasa-results under that major dasa-lord in spite of bis deathinflicting character should not be considered as endangering the life of the native.
12. During the dasa and antardasa of vrhaspati and Sukra or vice veraa the native is expected to be prosperous, he may be engaged in religious ceremonies and gets wealth. He may be the leader of the country with pomp and power but the planets must own favourable houses and gain strength.
(12-i) If those two planets are situated in the 6th and 8th places or 2nd and 12th places from each other and also combined with malefic and do not acquire positional strength the native may have dispute with his wife and children, there may be scandalous relation with women, fear from the head of administration, may be attacked with apoplexy etc.

Interesting results of the dasa and antardasa of Sukra and Sani :
l3. If both these planets being strong become yogakarakas, results of their dasa and antardasa are very unfavourable.  (Here strength of the planets means, the planets may be in Vargottam navamsa, in their exalted house, swakshetra or mooltrikona-house). Under such conditions of planets the native will be as good as a beggar in their dasa and antardasa even though be is fabulously rich like Kuver. But of these dasa and antardasa-lords if one is strong and another is weak the native will enjoy good results according to character and strength of the stronger planet.
14. If both of them  be weak and are posited in the 6th, 8th or 12th house or one of them is situated in the 6th or 8th place from another, or they own any of the dusthanas and be seated in those houses or be associated with the lord of dusthana the results of their dasa and antardasa will be exceptionally favourable.

15. Dasa and antardasa of Sani and Ravi : If these two planets qualify themselves as strong and fortified due to ownership of their own or exalted houses and at the same time occupy any kendra or kona, or they are owners of any kendra and kona the native is highly fortunate and is favoured by the king of the land (now-a-days kingship is abolished so it should be construed as Head of the State) the native earns sufficient money during the dasa and antardasa of Ravi and Sani or Sani and Ravi.If both of them are  unfavourable their dasa and antardasa
will be maliciously evil.
16. Dasa and antardasa of vrhaspati and Mangal :   Similarly if these two planets are strong and occupy any kendra or kona or they are owners of any kendra or kona and be yogakarakas and aspected by or combined with any favourable bhava-lord they confer on the native power, pomp and wealth and he passes his days happily with his wife and children, otherwise (i.e. if they are unfavourable) the results of their dasa and antardasa are very bad.
17. Dasa and antardasa of vrhaspati and Budha :  Here also the same rule is applicable, if they are strong and well-disposed and are placed in a kendra or kona from each other their dasa and antardasa will produce favourable result, The native may be successful in business enterprises, his academic career will be good, and his family life will be peaceful and he. shall pass his days happily.

Similar will be results of dasas and antardasas of Sukra and Budha, vrhaspati and Ravi, and vrhaspati and Chandra.

Maharshl Pansara's instructions about judgment of  Dasa and Antardasa
1. Maharshi Parasara laid down a few rules to assume an antardasa-lord as benefic or malefic under certain conditions. These rules may be treated as hints in rendering proper and accurate judgment of dasa and antardasa-results. But basic rules of determining favourable or unfavourable lord of a house according to lagna as noted down earlier must not be forgotten or misused.

Determination of favourable antardasa :
1. If lagnapathi is posited in his own navamsa, dwadasamsa, or drekkan his antardasa is favourable.
2. When lagnapathi  is posited  in his own  or friendly 'trimsamsa', friendly navamsa or dwadasamsa, or he is situated in the navamsa or dwadasamsa of the 5th lord his antardasa ill favourable.
3. The planet who is posited in the navamsa or dwadasamsa of the 4th or 9th lord produces favourable results in his antardasa.
4. The lagnapathi when posited in the navamsa, dwadasamsa, or drekkan of the lord of the sign where he (lagnapathi) is situated will do good to the native in his antardasa.

Similar favourable result is possible if lagnapathi is situated in the friendly navamsa, dwadasamsa or drekkan of the lord of the sign where lagnapathi is posited.

Unfavourable antardasa :
1. The antardasas of the lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th houses are productive of evil results and miseries.
2. If the lords of the 6th, 1st and marakasthanas ( 2nd & 7th places ) sit together in a house the antardasa of the 6th lord is very unfavourable.
3. Even if the 6th lord and lagnapathi together be conjoined with Chandra in Sadavarga the native suffers from indigestion and other stomach-trouble in the antardasa of the 6th lord. Over and above he has fear from water.
4. If lagnapathi and the lord of the 6th house together are combined with Budha in Sadavarga the native suffers from rheumatism or gout, phlegmatic ailments and physical inertia during the antardasa of the 6th lord.
5. If the aforesaid planets together are associated with vrhaspati in Sadavarga the native is attacked with many kinds of diseases during the antardasa of the 6th lord.
6. If those two planets (viz., lagnapathi and the lord of the 6th house) are combined with Sukra or Sani in Sedavarga the native falls ill due to excessive co-h bitation with women, during the antardasa of the 6th lord.
7. Even if Sani is favourable in Sadavarga the native cannot escape this unfavourable result.
8. If it is Mangal conjoined with lagnapathi and the lord of the 6th house in Sadavarga during the antardasa of the 5th lord the native is attacked with either rheumatism or typhoid
fever.

Laghu Parasari has  directed to look into 9 stages or avasthas of a planet before judging the dasa and antardasa.
These 9 stages are as follows :-
1. When a planet is in the house of exaltation it is the stage of "dipta" (blazing).
2. When a planet is in his own house it is the stage of "swastha"  (healthy).
3. When a planet is in the most friendly house it is the stage of "Pramudita" (cheerful).
4. When a planet is in a friendly house it is the stage of "Santa" ( peaceful).
5. When a plan t is in the neutral house it is the stage of "dina" (distressed).
6. When a planet is in an enemy house it is the stage of "atidookshita" (very afflicted).
7. When a planet is conjoined  with a malefic it is the stage of "bikala" (physically handicapped).
8. When a planet is situated in the house of a malefic it is the stage of "khala" (wicked).
9. When a planet is associated with sun or eclipsed by sun's rays it is the stage of "kupita" (angry).

Results of dasa and antardasas of planets of different stages :
1. During the dasa and antardasa of a 'dipta' planet the native becomes very active and energetic, there is increase of wealth, courage and power, posession of conveyance, gain of friends, influence, name and fame and authority etc.
2. During the dasa and antardasa of "swastha" planet results are almost the same as before but intensity of good effect is slightly less than the 'dipta' planet's dasa and antardasa.
3. During the dasa and antardasa of a 'pramudita' planet results are as follows : gain of money, land, perfumes, clothes and  ornaments etc.  The native becomes sober and  he takes delight in listening and reading the puranas.
4. During the dasa and antardasa of a 'santa' planet the native acquires knowledge from religious scriptures and becomes highly educated and learned, he gets royal reception and wealth and happiness.

The first four stages of planets noted above are favourable, Of these four stages result of dasa-antardasa of 'Pramudita' planet is more favourable than 'santa' planet's dasa-antardasa. Results of "swastha" planets' dasa-antardasa is more favourable than Pramudita and 'dipta' planet's dasa-antardasa is more favourable than 'swastha' planet's dasa-antardasa.

5. During the dasa and antardasa of a 'dina' planet - dislodgement from residence or place of occupation, dispute with and separation from friend, bodily affliction due to prolonged illness.
6. Dasa and antardasa of 'ati-dookshita' planet-suffering from too much miseries, fear from king and thief, friendlessness, sojourn to a foreign land.
7. Dasa and antardasa of 'bikala' planet - physical inertia, bad health, loss of friends, conveyance and clothings, bad time of native's wife and children, fear from thief etc.
8. Dasa and antardasa of a 'khala' planet - quarrel, death of a friend and a superior person, loss of mental peace due to activities of enemies, loss of wealth and land, to be defamed by the native's own men.
9. Dasa and antardasa of 'kupita' planet - to be engaged in sinful acts, bad results regarding education and money, bad time for wife and children, loss of friends.

Results or Mahadasa and Antardasa ( According to Sarvartha Chintamoni )
General Rules : When planets are in their exalted hous, attain exalted navamsa, or posited in their own house results of their Mahadasa vis-a-vis dasa and antardasa are f11vourable.

Ravi's mahadasa - When Ravi is in 10 degree in Mesa rasi he in in his highest exalted point.  In his mahadasa the native may get Government service, he may be favoured and honoured by Government. There is possibility of increase of wealth and cattle. There are possibilities of unfavourable results too, such as dispute and quarrel with kith and kin, being disgusted the native may leave his houseland, moral degradation and enmity with others.

When Ravi is 'Arohi' ( 'Arohi' means ascending )- Ravi's maximum debilitated point is 10 degree in Tula rasi. When he goes beyond 10 degree he is 'Arohi', 'Arohi' (ascending) Ravi in his dasa will give the native name and fame, luck will favour him, besides he will earn money in exchange of agricultural products. Though technically an ascending planet Ravi is said to he able to confer these good results. In practical instance planets when ascending can not impart favourable results in all cases unless they are otherwise strong. The first part of the dasa of an ascending planet can not give favourable results but the second part is much better than the first part.

When Ravi is debilitated - The native shall incur displeasure  of the king (head of the state) and he sustains loss of money and prestige. Other results are - bereavement, miseries, worries, loss of superior persons or wife and children, dislodgement from homestead, dispute with others. Ravi will give similar results if he is debilitated in navamsa chart. Even if exalted Ravi in the natal chart be posited in the house of debilitation in the navamsa chart he gives unfavourable  results in the second part of the dasa.

Ravi's antardasa under Ravi's mabadasa - If Ravi is strong during his antardasa the native shall get royal favour, he will succeed in all his endeavours. If Ravi is weak the results will be unfavourable such as : The native shall wander through wild and hilly countries, he shall have disappointing results in all enterprises and lose name and fame.

Chandra's antardasa under Ravi's dasa - When Chandra has her antardasa during the progress of Ravi's mahadasa the native shall earn money through agricultural pursuits, he will vanquish his enemies, overcome his miseries, and get more friends.   The native will get those favourable results under the following conditions :
(a)  Chandra  is positionally strong, (b) She is waxing, (c) is posited in a benefic rasi, and (d) aspected by or conjoined with a benefic. If it is otherwise - that is, if Chandra is weak positionally, either in birth or navamsa chart, aspected by or associated with a malefic the results of her antardasa will be unfavourable. The native may be attacked with cough and cold, consumption, indigestion, disease arising from water, he shall lose mental peace and suffer from miseries.

According to Parasari  Hora - If Chandra  is situated in dusthana the native shall suffer from mental agony, possibility of dislodgement from his permanent house, dispute and quarrel with relatives, be may suffer from painful micturition and he may have fear from king annd thief. If benefic Chandra is situated in the 9th, 11th or in any kendra during Chandra's antardasa (or bhukti) the native shall enjoy his days happily, shall make new friends, shall get money, position and status. He shall be blessed with children, grand children etc. If Chandra is the lord of the 2nd or 7th place from lagna and is posited in any dusthana during Chandra's antardasa death of the native may be possible.

Mangal's antardasa under Ravi's Mahadasa - First and foremost thing is to look after is whether Mangal is strong, yogakaraka and  posited in kendra or kona from Ravi, and he is not posited in any dusthana from lagna. Then Mangal will produce very good results, such as, the native shall aquire	landed property, may build a house of his own, be shall be appreciated by all for his valour, and energetic and manly performances.  As a yogakaraka Mangal in his antardasa may help the native attain a very high position, earn good money and name and fame. Such a strong and yogakaraka Mangal may make the native a leader of the country during his antardasa. If Mangal is weak, posited in a dusthana, aspected by or in any other way related with a malefic the native may suffer from wounds and various diseases, such as - dysentery, piles, or ailments effected by poisonous drugs. He may have to court imprisonment, may have quarrel with his brother or sister and may lose his service.


Rahu's antardasa under Ravi's Mahadasa - Rahu's antardasa will be favourable under the following conditions:-
(i) If be is well-disposed in the natal chart and also posited in favourabl navamsa, and associated with a favourable planet. (ii) if he occupies any upachayasthana (3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th houses) or being in any kendra be is associated with lord of the 5th or 9th houses, or being in a kona he is associated with lord of any kendra.  Under these circumstances if Rahu is not situated in 6th, 8th or 12th place from Ravi the native, during the antardasa of Rahu shall get opportunity to prosper brilliantly, he shall get royal favour, shall be appreciated by all for his glorious deeds. The antardasa of a favourable Rahu will bring fortune to the native and his house will look bright due to performances of ceremonious festivals.

Rahu when weak - If Rahu is weak or posited in any dusthana from Ravi, following unfavourable results are possible, such as creation of new enemies on account of misdeeds of the native, loss of money and accumulated wealth, the native may have to face various troubles, there may be danger from poison and snake, fear from thief, possibility of destruction of domestic cattle, house and land. The native shall have strong desire to appease sensual pleasure. He may be a1tacked with strong diarrhoea, may  suffer from chronic disease due to enlargement of spleen, abdominal tumour or consumption etc. If weak Rahu is posited in the 2nd or 7th place ftom lagna or he is combined with the lord of the 2nd or 7th place - there is danger of accidental death or snake-bite.

Vrhaspathl's antardasa under Ravi's Mahadasa - vrhaspati is the only planet out of 9, who can do immense good to the native if be is well-disposed, strong, and posited in kendra or kona from the lord of Mahadasa. When is vrhaspati strong ? He is considered as strong when he occupies his own house, house of exaltation, mooltrikona house or is posited in exalted or friendly navamsa, or aspected by or conjoined with a friendly planet. If strong vrhaspati is situated in kendra or kona from lagna or Ravi or from both, the results of vrhaspati's antardasa under the major period of Ravi will be favourable. The native shall earn good  money, ,shall take pleasure to worship gods and adore brahmins. He shall attain success in all works with the help of the state. During the progress of vrhaspati's antardasa there is possibility of marriage and birth of a son. If vrhaspati owns the 9th or 10th house the native shall attain a very high position and shall make friends with men of high social standing.  He shall be very lucky and shall get respect and honour from all. He may visit holy shrines and shall be in the company of pious and religious-minded men.

Weak vrhaspati when posited in the 6th, 8th and 12th place from Ravi - His antardasa will be very unfavourable, such as: the native may fall very badly ill, may be attacked with indigestion, stomach ache, consumptive disease, disease in ears; his children may fall ill, he may be a victim of wrath of the head of the state, may sustain loss of wealth due to sinful acts.

Sani's	antardasa	under	Ravi's	Mahadasa - Readers are requested first to go through the results contemplated by the author of Uttarakalamrita, such as, the native may fall badly ill, may be attacked with stomach-ache, indigestion, consumptive disease, disease of the ear, native's children too may fall ill, he may be a victim of wrath of the bead of the state, loss of wealth due to sinful acts etc. In Phaladipika the author mentioned only malefic results to be enjoyed by the native but in Parasari Hora the results are as follows : If Sani is in kendra or kona position, there is possibility of destruction of enemies and gain of little money. The native, according to that book shall enjoy his days very happily. If Sani is situated in the house of exaltation, friendly house or his own house or accompanied by a friend, there is possibility of marriage-ceremony in his house, he gets royal favour and earns name and fame. The author further says that if Sani is weak and is posited in any dusthana the native shall sustain loss of money, may be hard hit due to excessive expenditure, may lose his belongings, he may be attacked with various diseases, such as, diarrhoea, rheumatism, colic pain, and phlegmatic ailments. There is possibility of sudden quarrel with bis own kinsmen or any other person, even the native may have to court imprisonment.

Uttarakalamrita endorses the view of Mabarsbi Parasara but has not stated the results in detail. The author only said that the  native shall be favoured by the king (i.e. Head of the State) and he shall be lucky if Sani and Ravi are situated in their exalted houses or own houses etc. (Even if the planets are well-placed in navamsa chakra beneficial result will be possible). But if these two planets are weak and are placed in an unfavourable house the native will enjoy very unfavourable result.

Dasa  and  antardasa  of  vrhaspati  and  Mangal - When vrhaspati and Mangal acquire strength and be placed in kendra and kona, or they may own any kendra or kona house and related to each other and be yogakarakas, or they being lords of favourable houses are conjoined with or aspected by benefics during their dasa and antardasa the native may be endowed with very many favourable results, such as, earning much wealth, excercising authority over many, be dignified etc. He is happy with his wife and children. If the planets are ill-disposed, weak and have other faults the results will be the reverse.

Dasa and antardasa of vrhaspati and Budha : In case of these two planets if they are strong, well-disposed, be placed in kendra or kona, or qualify themselves as favourable the native gets good education, learned friends, prosperity in business and; be happy. Otherwise results will be very unfavourable.

CHAPTER XIV
RAJAYOGAS
Raja means king, yoga means relation by combination, aspect, exchange of houses etc. So, Rajayoga should literarily signify a yoga that	makes a person	king.	But	truly	speaking the word Rajayoga does not carry any such meaning. It is needless to mention here that the term denotes a very beneficial relation between one planet with another or relation between lords of different bhavas that may confer fortune, money, prestige, social status, pomp and power.
   
In Parasari Hora there are four kinds of Rajayogas. They are described as hereunder :
Rajayoga is produced-
1. When lord of a kendra is related to the lord of a kona (We already know that there are four kendras and three konas,. viz., lagna,the 4th, the 7th and the 10th houses or bhavas are four kendras. Again lagna, the 5th and the 9th houses are konas). Lagna is both a kendra and a kona. Formation	of this auspicious	yoga is subject to a few conditions which will be explained one by one.
Relation between lords of kendra and kona will be very effective when
(1a) The two planets exchange their houses. This is the major Rajayoga. Please note that excepting Ravi and Chandra each planet owns two houses. Say, Lagna is in mithuna, the 4th lord (who himself is Lagnadhipathi) is in Tula, the 5th house and the lord of the 5th house Sukra occupies the 4th. So, there is an exchange of houses between lord of the 4th house (a kendra)  and the lord of the 5th (a kona). Now Budha owns mithuna and Kanya, and Sukra, the lord of Tula and Vrsa. If Budha is in Vrsa and Sukra is in mithuna, the Rajayoga is not produced as it is an exchange of houses between Lagna-lord and the lord of the 12th house which is neither a kendra nor a kona.
(1b) If one yogakaraka planet is seated in the house owned by another yogakaraka planet and the latter is aspected by the former and there is no aspect of the latter planet on the former Rajayoga is produced. As for instance, Mangal is posited in Kumbha the house of Sani being in Kanya, here Mangal occupying Sani's house aspects Sani who has no aspect on Mangal. Of these two planets on must be the lord of a kendra the other the lord of a kona.
(1c) It will be a Rajayoga when there is mutual aspect between kendrapathi and konapathi.
(1d) When kendrapathi and konapathi are associated with one another it will also he a Rajayoga. Further, when these two are posited in one varga Rajayoga will he the result.

Any of these four kinds of Rajayogas may do good to the native during the dasa and antardasa of yogakaraka planets.

When Rajayoga is considered defunct ?
1. If a natural benefic is the lord of a kendrasthana (i.e. 4th, 7th, 10th & the 1st) that benefic planet becomes a papa (malefic). When a natural malefic is the lord of any kendra he is considered as a favourable planet. vrhaspati, Sukra, waxing Moon and Budha when are not associated with any malefic are naturally beneficial planets.  If these planets are lords of any kendra they are taken to be as malefics.
2. Sani, Ravi, Mangal, waning Moon and papa Budha (when he is associated with any malefic) are natural malefics. They are considered as favourable due to ownership of any kendra.
3. Lords of the 3rd, 6th and 11th are also pspa (malefic) planets. Of these three lords, the 11th lord is the most powerful malefic and the 6th lord is more powerful than the 3rd.
4. The lords of the 2nd and the 12th have peculiar role to play. They give the effect of those lords of bhavas with whom they are related by way of combination with or aspect by anyone of the four rajayoga-karakas referred to above. Their independent function is not acknowledged by learned astrologers. They are so to say neutral planets neither favourable nor unfavourable. Each planet excepting Ravi and Chandra owns two houses. Of these two houses one may be any one of the 2nd and the 11th and other may be a kendra or kona. If these lords are not related to any other planet, the result good or bad may be determined according to their position. If they are in malefic houses (such as 6th, 8th or 12th pla e) their result will be unfavourable, again if they are in beneficial houses good will be the result. Strength of favourable or unfavourable results of the 2nd and the 12th lords may be judged through those planets with whom the former planets are attached by combination, aspect or by any other relationship. In case of Ravi and Chandra effectiveness of good or bad result may be judged from their relation with
other bhava-lords.
5. When a planet owns a kendra and alsc, any one of the 3rd, 6th and 11th houses his relation with the lord of the konapathi will not produce any Rajayoga.	vrhaspati and Sukra being naturally most auspicious planets are the strongest malefics due to their ownership of any kendra. Of these two planets vrhaspati is more malefic than Sukra who is more unfavourable than beneficial Budha and Budha is more unfavourable than Chandra. Therefore vrhaspati and Sukra have priority over all other marakas when they are lords of the 2nd or 7th houses or both.
This is the reason why for the native of Mesa lagna Sukra is said to be the strongest maraka. If a planet is the lord of lagna and the 8th house he will not be considered as a papa because of his lordship cf lagna. Mangal of Mesa lagna native therefore is not a papa and so also the case with Sukra of Tula lagna native. For all practical purposes Sukra of Tula lagna is not taken to be a favourable planet by learned astrologers.
6. The lord of the 5th and 9th houses are favourable but Sukra of Kanya lagna and vrhaspati of Vrschika lagna do not give auspicious result during their dasa and antardasa due to their lordship of the 2nd house which is a marakasthan. This is explained elaborately later on. This is also to be noted that none of the standard books on Astrology has mentioned anything like that. But this is our practical experience, and we dare claim that their unfortunate result in many horoscopes was a reality.
7. If the 9th and 10th lords become inauspicious due to their ownership of any dusthana 3rd, 6th, 8th, 11th, or 12th houses they will be giving favourable result when they exchange their houses, in other words, if the 9th lord occupies the 10th house and the 10th lord is in the 9th.
8. When lagnapathi and dhanapathi (lord of the dhana 2nd house) are related to each other by one of the 4 kinds of relationship it is a wealth-giving yoga.
(8i) Relationship  between  4th  and  5th  lords - it makes a person a minister or an advisor to any institution.
(8ii) Relationship between 2nd and 3rd lords - It makes a person a Government officer.
(8iii) Relationship between 5th and 6th lords - The person will be engaged in dangerous activities. The birth Chart of Shivaji may be consulted.
(8iv) Relationship between 10th and 11th lords - The person having such a yoga may acquire land, money etc.
(8v) Relationship between Atmakaraka planet and lagna - It is one of the best Rajayogas when positioned in one rasi, that makes a man very fortunate.
(8vi) Relationship between 5th lord & Putrakaraka - lt may make a man intelligent and wealthy. (Maharsi Parasara did not mention the nature of the result ).
(8vii) When atmakaraka lagna is situated in a kendra from lagna, or atmakaraka planet is situated in any kendra or kona from lagna or from Chandra or the lord of the rasi where Chandra is posited - all these yogas make a man prosperous, popular and wealthy.
9. Maharaja yoga : When the lord of lagna or the 7th place occupying lagna, or the 7th house is related to atmakaraka and putrakaraka planet or the latter is aspected by either lagna lord or the lord of the 7th house and the atmakaraka and putrakaraka are aspected by the lord of the 5th house, the native enjoys power, pomp and respect from many.
10.  If  lagna and atmakaraka planet are situated in the 5th or 7th place from the 9th lord it is a Rajayoga that makes a man prosperous ; he owns many kinds of conveyances and becomes a wealthy person.
11. If the 2nd, 4th and 5th  places from atmakaraka  planet are occupied by benefics and 3rd and 6th places by malefics the native flourishes in his career, he gets pomp and power in abundance. If those places are occupied  by  both benefic and  malefic planets the result may not be excellent but his career may be better than average men.
12. If Sukra is placed in the 5th place from either atmakaraka planet, Arudha-lagnapada or Jata-lagna and she is conjoined with or aspected by vrhaspati or Chandra the native is born of a royal family or he is intimately related to the king of the land.
--------------------
13 - 15 deleted, too complex
--------------------

16. If the lagna, 2nd and 4th places from lagna are occupied by benefic planets and malefic planet or planets are situated in the 3rd place from lagna the native becomes a king or a prosperous man like a king,
-----------------------
17, 18 deleted
-----------------------
19. A planet or planets become "Raja-yogakaraka" under the following conditions :-
(i) If the 5th place from Chara lagna is aspected by a planet.
(ii)  If the 9th place from Sthira lagna is aspected by a planet.
(iii) If the 10th place from Dwatyaka lagna is aspected by a planet.
The aspecting planet or planets are Raja-yogakarakas. (Some astrologers are of opinion, in case of Dwatyaka lagna planet• aspecting any kendra (4th, 7th, 10th and ht) will bc Rajayoge.karakas.)
20. If a powerful planet occupies the 4th place from lagna he will be a Rajayogakaraka, but if that 4th house falls in dwatyaka rasi the very best Raja yoga result is expected, if the 4th house falls in sthira rasi the result will be better and in case of 4th place being a chara rasi the result will be good. This means Sthira rasi is better than Chara rasi and Dwatyaka rasi is better than sthira rasi.
21. If a planet occupying 4th or 11th place aspects lagna or dhana bbava - 2nd place from lagna - the native will possess conveyances and becomes happy. Only this yoga will make him a moneyed man if his birth chirt does not contain any other Rajayoga. This yoga will be highly effective in case of Karkata, Dhanu. and Mina lagnas. In case of Karkata lagna if Sani occupies Tula rasi (4th place from lagna) or Vrsa rasi [11th place from lagna) aspect of Sani upon lagna is possible, hence, Sani is yogakaraka.  Mangal in Vrsa rasi also will be a yogakaraka as his aspect falls on the 2nd place from the 11th house. In case of Dbanu lagna also Sani will be Rajayogakaraka if he is posited in the 4th or 11th house. Mangal also will be yogakaraka being in the 11th house from Dhanu lagna. In case of Mina lagna both Sani and Mangal will be Rajayogakaraka.
22. Sukha (happiness) yoga : The native will enjoy material happiness if the 4th lord from lagna or atmakaraka lagna casts his aspect on Jata lagna or atmakaraka planet.
23. If atmakaraka and amatyakaraka planets are combined with or aspected by the 10th lord or the 10th lord is aspected by amatyakaraka planet the native will become a highly placed officer under Government of the land.
24. If the atmakaraka planet being conjoined with or aspected by the 9th lord is situated in kendra or kona place from lagna the native becomes a minister.
25. If the rasi-patbi (the lord of the rasi where Chandra is situated in the natal chart) becomes the atmakaraka, being conjoined with a benefic he is posited in lagna the native becomes a minister in old age.
26. The native becomes an illustrious personality and all his endeavours will be successful if atmakaraka planet or Jata-lagna is placed in the 7th or 9th place from the 5th lord.
--------------------
27 deletd
--------------------
28. If the lord of the 11th house from lagna unaspected by any malefic is situated in the 11th house and atmakaraka planet is conjoined with a benefic the native acquires wealth through the grace of the king of the land.
29. If Chandra and Sukra jointly are situated in the 4th place from atmakaraka planet the native upto the last day of his life enjoys happiness, wealth, honour and prestige. He is highly placed in society he live11 in and is held in high-esteem by others. Only this yoga is sufficient to make him happy.
30. If atmakaraka planet being in his mooltrikona  house is associated with the 5th lord from lagna the native acquires name and fame.
31. If the 9th lord being aspected by or conjoined with atmakaraka planet is placed in the 9th or 11th house and 5th lord is posited in the 5th place the native acquires as much wealth as he likes. One condition in this yoga must be fulfilled.  It is that, both 5th and 9th lords must be either in conjunction with or aspected by the atmakaraka planet. Some of the commentators are of opinion that of the two lords of the 5th and 9th houses if one is in conjunction with and the other is aspected by the atmakaraka planet this yoga will be fruitful.
-------------------
32 -Baraha Mihir yoga deleted
-------------------
33. (i) When all the planets being in the cardinal (movable} signs are situated in kendra-position from lagna the native becomes a wealthy man but he will be a dishonest person and reside in a foreign land.  The yoga is termed as Rajju yoga. (ii) When all the planets being in fixed signs are situated in kendra positions from lagna the native shall be a very rich man with a strong sense of self-respect. The yoga is termed as Musul yoga. (iii) Similarly in case of  the  planets being in dual sign {Dwatyaka rasi) and in the kendra positions from lagna the native may be physically crippled but he will be intelligent, tactful and wealthy.
34. If benefic and malefic planets are placed in all the four kendras the yoga is termed as Kamal yoga. If any kendra is occupied by only malefic the yoga will not be disturbed. He who has Kamal yoga in his birth-chart becomes illustrious, talented, famous and happy. Sri Rama Chandra had Kamal yoga in his chart.
35. When all the "planets are posited in Panafar (2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th places) or Apoklima houses (3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th houses) the native keeps good health all through his life, he knows the tact of accumulating money and becomes a miser.
36. If from the beginning of lagna upto 7th place each house is occupied by planets the native becomes a famous man no doubt tbut he is miserly and enjoys unsteady fortune. The yoga is called Nou yoga.

When a native has sense of decency or aestheticism ?

37. (i)	When Chandra is posited in apoklima place (3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th houses) from Ravi, it is named as "Baristha yoga". (ii) When Chandra is situated in Panafar (2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th places).(iii) When Chandra is in kendra from Ravi. Of these three yogas the 1st  one is the best, the 2nd one is the next best and the 3rd one is the weakest. Besides the native's sense of decency the  yoga makes a man great in many spheres of life. See birth charts of Einstein, Rajendra Prasad, Jagadish Chandra	Bose,	Rabindra Nath Tagore, Balgangadhar Tilak etc.    All these great men's horoscope, contain this Baristha yoga. In this connection, Uttarakalamrita a notable hook on astrology said to have been written by Mahakavi Kalidasa has given a very sure and certain clue for testing the effectiveness of Baristha yoga. According to this book if Chandra is posited in his own, friendly or exalted navamsa and conjoined with or aspected by either Sukra or vrhaspati the yoga will be very brilliantly effective. Of course, Uttarakalamrita said separately in rajayoga chapter that if Chandra is situated in his own, friendly or exalted. narnmsa and at the same time conjoined with or aspected by vrhaspati or Sukra the native becomes omniscient, highly meritorious and benevolent. He is also a man of strong. personality.
38. Adhi Yoga : If Budha, vrhaspati and Sukra - these three benefics are situated in the 6th, 7th and 8th places from Chandra it is termed as Adhi yoga. This is a highly efficacious. yoga which gives a man good health, high education, wealth, position, status and happiness. According to Jataka Parijat it is named as Chandradhi yoga. The benefic planets may sit together h only one of those houses or they may occupy separately all those three houses. All the authoritative books agree with Brihat-Jataka about the efficacy of Adhiyoga.  But some commentators of Jataka Parijat (a dependable book on astrology) said that if the 7th place from Chandra is occupied by Ravi the yoga may not be as fruitful as it should be. Kalyan Varma, renowned author of Saravali said that if those benefic planets are not combust or not associated with malefic planets Adhiyoga will be effective. Uttarakalamrita says  that  if  those  benefic  planets  are accompanied by unfavourable planets Adhiyoga shall not impart. farnurable result. Many astrologers of high repute do not agree with Uttarakalamrita. Our experience is that even partial adhiyogas in many cases are found to be fruitful. Readers may see the  horoscopes of Deshabandhu Chittaranjan Das, Rajendra Prasad the first President of India, Swami Sivananda, the great disciple of Ramakrishna etc. In their horoscopes those benefic planets are associated with malefic planets too. Maharshi Parasara has cited "Lagnadhi yoga" in the following manner. Lagnadhi yoga : If benefic planets are situated in the 6th, 7th or 8th houses from lagna it will be named as Lagnadhi yoga. So, we may differentiate the two yccgas by calling the first one as Chandradhi yoga and the second one as Lagnadhi yoga.
39. Sunapha yoga - If any planet or planets other than Ravi are placed in second place from Chandra it is termed as Sunapha yoga. Those who have this yoga may be wealthy, and powerful men like kings. The planets that form the yoga must be strong, otherwise the yoga may not be very effective. Weak planets positing in the second place from Chandra make the native an important man only in the environment he lives and monetery aflluency will be moderate.
39.(a) When Sunapha yoga ia formed by Mangal (i.e. when Mangal is in the 2nd place from Chandra) the native will be a hypocrite, a man of resolute mind, courageous, wealthy and short-tempered.
39.(b)When Sunapha yoga is  formed by  Budha the native becomes highly educated in vedic norms and rules, a great artist, is sweet-tongued and virtuous. He is a man of keen intellect.
39.(c) When vrhaspati causes this yoga the native is profoundly learned, born of a high family, prosperous, famous, a favourite person to king, very sympathetic to his own kith and kin and prosperous.
39.(d) If Sukra causes this yoga the native is a mighty man, energetic, owns movable and immovable properties and possesses vast landed property. He lives in an ostentatious style.
39.(e) If Sani forms Sunapha yoga the native is held in high esteem by men in villages and also in cities ; he is meritorious, wealthy and a business magnet. According to Brihat-Jataka the native hankers after other's wealth, is engaged in various types of work and becomes a chairman of an assembly.
40. Anapha yoga - If the twelfth house from Chandra is occupied by a planet or planets other than Ravi this Anapha yoga is formed. To make the yoga very effective the yogakaraka planets must be strong. If a planet or planets situated in the 2nd or 12th house from Chandra are conjoined with Ravi the yogas will not be disturbed. But those yogakaraka planets shall not be combust. Anapha yoga makes a  man materially happy, he is healthy famous and keeps good moral character.
40.(a) When Anapha yoga is formed by Mangal (i.e. whan Mangal occupies the 12th place from Chandra) the native is an obstinate, head-strong and violent man. He is also a man of irritable temper and becomes a leader of a gang of robbers.
40.(b) If Budha is the cause of anapha yoga the native becomes an expert musician, renowned artist, educated, an orator, a distinguished and handsome man. He is honoured by the king of the land.
40.(c) If vrhaspati is posited in the 12th place from Chandra the native is scrupulous to follow religious practices. He is energetic and spirited, moral-minded, just, wealthy and a distinguished person of extra-ordinary personality and sharp intellect.  He holds a topmost position in the society.
40.(d) If Sukra causes anapha yoga the native charms young women, he is a man of keen intellect, master of huge wealth, possesses cattle, horses etc., and passes his days happily.
40.(e) If Anapha yoga is formed by Sani the native is talented and a owner of cattle. He is a long armed man. He may be one of the leading personalities in the society. His words carry some weight, but he may be attached to women of loose morals. At the same time this is also to be remembered that Sani in the 12th place from Chandra is the cause of worries and anxieties, and loss of mental peace.
41. Durudhara or Uvachary yoga - If the 2nd and 12th houses from Chandra are occupied by planets other than Ravi it is called Durudhara or Uvachary yoga. A man having this yoga is really a fortunate man. He is an owner of palatial building, possesses own car or cars, has great wealth and many servants to serve him, and commands over many men.
41.(a) If Mangal and Budha are situated in the 2nd and 12th places from Chandra the native becomes meritorious no doubt but he will be a liar, greedy and attached to a young woman of bad character.
41.(b) If the yoga is formed by Mangal and vrhaspati the native will be a man of name and fame. By dint of his tremendous labour and untiring efforts, he builds his own fortune but he is to face many enemies who create troubles even in his day-to-day activities. His moral-mindedness gives inspiration to his family memembers also.
41.(c) If the yoga is formed by Mangal and Sukra the native may be a wrestler.  He  is a handsome man, always cheerful, wealthy  and is desirous of acquiring religious knowledge.  But at times the native indulges in cruel acts.
41.(d) If Sani and Mangal are  posited  in  the 12th and 2nd places from Chandra the native is addicted to low caste women, wealthy  and a  traitor.  He remains  unperturbed  even if he is surrounded by his  enemies and ultimately he can subdue them.
41.(e) If  Budha  and Sukra cause this yoga the native has great attachment to music and art of dancing. He is a sweet-tongued, Very intelligent and sober person.
41.(f) If Budha and Sani are the cause of this yoga the native ikes to tour over many countries, acquires medium educ&tion, wealthy and  respected  by many  but  he  hates  his own kith and kin.
41.(g)  If vrhaspati and Sukra form this yoga the native is a pure-minded man, famous, valourous, gentle, cultured and prosperous. His habit and manner of talk are like that of a king.
41.(h) If Sani and vrhaspati are posited in the 12th and 2nd places from Chandra the native becomes gentle, modest, wise, 1earned, meritorious, wealthy, handsome and happy.
42.(i) If Sani and Sukra are the cause of Durudhara yoga the native becomes a leader among men of his own class, always follows old customs, highly prosperous and wealthy and dear to the king of the land.

45. Chatursagara yoga - When Mesa, Karkata, Tula and makara rasis are occupied by planets, this yoga ia formed provided Lagna rises in any of these rasis. These rasis are natural kendra positions in the Zodiac.  Compare this with Kamala yoga. Chatursagara yoga makes a native highly intelligent, vastly learned, glorious and a powerful king.
46. Ekabali yoga - When each planet is situated in a rasi including lagna one after another the yoga thus formed is termed as Ekabali. This sloka is quoted from Somajataka. Similar sloka is found in Bhavakautuhala. Ekabali yoga makes a man a king of kings, pious, and a son of an honest father. He subdues all his enemies.

The following yogas are quoted from Jataka-Parijat : (I have selected a few important yogas only. Inquisitive students may find vast number of Rajayogas in Jataka-Parljat and other authoritative treatises on astrology ).
47. If all the planets are situated in Kanya, Mesa, Tula, Simha. and Kumbha the native becomes a king.
48. If the 3rd, 4th and 5th houses are occupied by all the planets the native becomes a king.
49. If all the planets are posited in Chandra's Hora the native becomes a famous king.
50. If all the benefics are  in the 9th and 11th houses and malefic planets occupy 6th and 10th houses the native becomes a king.
51. If the 10th lord is posited in the 8th place and occupies his exalted house, own or friendly house in navamsa chakra or that lord of the 10th house acquires "Paravat Varga" the native becomes lord of all kings. A planet is said to be in Paravat Varga, if he acquires his own six Vargas.
52. If debilitated	vrhaspati be in lagna (this means vrhaspati is in Makara rasi), 8th place is occupied by malefic or malefics and the 8th lord be posited in a malefic house in navamsa. chart the native becomes a lord of all kings.
53. There are five kinds, of Rajayogas mentioned in Phaladipika and Jataka-Parijat. All the yogas are called by different name.) viz. :
(a) When Mangal being in his own house, house of exaltation or Mooltrikona is posited in any kendra it is called Ruchaka yoga.
(b) When Budha being in his own, exalted or Mooltrikona house is situated in any kendra it is called Bhadra yoga.
(c) When vrhaspati also be posited in the aforesaid position it is termed as Hamsa yoga.
(d) Similarly if Sukra be situated in the like manner it is termed as Malavya yoga.
(e) If Sani be placed in kendra and occupies his own, exalted or Mooltrikona house it i.s termed as Sasa yoga.
Ruchaka yoga - makes a man strong-built, healthy, fortunate, glorious and highly qualified. He who has "Ruchaka" yoga in his birth chart is highly proficient in many branches of science. He knows the secret of "Mantra-sakti" and by enchanting mantras he can possess a great power of incantation. The native is very beautiful to look at, kind, benevolent, wealthy and successful in all his endeavours. He passes his days very happily and lives upto 70 years of age.
Bhadra yoga - The native's face is ferocious like that of a tiger, his movement is like that of an elephant, he has broad chest, muscular arms and manly figure. He is energetic and spirited, he is very much affectionate to his friends and kith and kin. The native will be a famous king, his treasury will be full of precious stones. Longivity will be 80 years of age.
Hamsa yog - The native has a gracefully tall figure, his face has the lustre of red lotus, he has sharp nose, extraordinarily beautiful feet. His complexion is like that of 'kandarpa' (god of love and beauty), he is endowed with all virtues and has a beautiful wife. He is a true religious-minded man, passes his days by reading Puranas and religious scriptures and lives upto 82 years of age.
Malavya yoga -the native has graceful figure, manner of his movement is very beautiful, be has large beautiful eyes, handsome complexion and his facial cut will also be beautiful. His lower lip is thick. He is highly qualified and powerful and may acquire wide knowledge about religious scriptures. He is energetic and knows the secret of incantation. He enjoys happiness among his own children and grand-children and live upto 77 years of age. He may have illegal attachment with other's wife or wives,
Sasa yoga - Complexion of the native is black, be bas ugly and blood-shot eyes; he is brave, energetic, devoted to mother, munificent and charitable but cruel. In order to attain knowledge of metal and mineral he will cheat others. He would like to live in an ostentatious style and will be lascivious and addicted to other's wife. His longivity is 70 years of age.
54. If at least any one of the lords of the 2nd, 9th and 11th houses is situated in kendra position from Chandra and vrhaspati is the lord of the 11th house the native rules over a great empire.  This is quoted from Jataka-Parijat but Phaladlpika slightly differs from Jataka-parijat. According to Phaladipika the yoga will be formed if vrhaspati being the lord of the 11th house is combined with the 5th lord. Other conditions are the same as Jataka-parijat.
55. Bhaskar yoga - If Budha is in the 2nd place from Chandra or Chandra in the 11th place from Budha and vrhaspati is posited in 9th place from Chandra the native will he brave, beautiful to look at, resolute, efficient and a very important man in the country or the society. He has sonorous voice and is vastly learned in many shastras and is able to explain correctly the inner meaning of them.
56. Indra yoga - If Mangal is posited in the 3rd place from Chandra, Sani is in the 7th place from mangal and vrhaspati is in the 7th house from Sukra, the native is modest, gentle, peace-loving and as prosperous as a king. He is powerful, wealthy, earns name and fame.
57. Marut yoga - lf vrhaspati is situated in any trikona place (5th & 9th house) from Sukra, Chandra is in the 5th place from vrhaspati and Ravi is in kendra from Chandra the native is a renowned orator, learned in many shastras, and prosperous like a king.  Be has bulky belly, broad chest and is highly successful in trade.
Budha yoga - If vrhaspati is associated with lagna, Chandra is in a kendra from vrhaspati, Rahu is posited in the 2nd place from Chandra and Ravi and mangal occupy the 3rd place from Chandra the native is very powerful man, he is very talented, learned in many shastras, famous and very expert in automobile
engineering.
59. Lagnadhi yoga - If benefic planets are posited in the 6th, 7th and 8th places from lagna and they are not aspected by or associated with any malefics and also the 4th house from lagna is not associated with any malefic this yoga makes a man noble  minded, benevolent, unprejudiced and a philosopher. His name and fame spreads throughout the world and he is widely known as a wealthy man. He will be author of many treatises on science. (This LagJJadhi yoga ia slightly different from the one stated earlier,) This sloka is quoted from Parasari Hora. Jataka-Parijat also has given much importance to this yoga but there are a few commentators who hold this opinion that the yoga will be very much effective if unfavourable planets from their positions in any house other than the 4th place do not aspect or combine with those benefic planets.
60. Gajakeshari yoga - If Vrhaspati is posited in any kendra (angular place) from Chandra, or when vrhaspati, Sukra and Budha are not combust or debilitated and have full aspect on Chandra Gajakeshari yoga is formed. The native having this yoga in his birth-chart will be energetic, meritorious, efficient, affluent and dear to the king of the land.
61. Jeeva yoga - When Chandra and vrhaspati are situated in the 7th place from each other this yoga is termed as Jeeva yoga. The native becomes benevolent, learned, efficient, affluent and energetic. The result of Gajakcshari and Jeeva yogas are almost identical to each other.
62. Parvata yoga --(i) If favourable planet or planets are placed in any kendra from lagna and 6th or 8th place are associated with benefic planet or those places remain vacant, or    (ii) If Lagnapathi ( lagna-lord ) and Vyayapathi (twelfth lord) are situated in kendra from each other and they are aspected by friendly planets  Parvata yoga is formed.  The native having Parvata yoga in his birth chart will be prosperous, noble, benevolent, energetic, powerful, spirited, an illustrious person, and a supreme personality in an institution. He is highly educated and learned. If the 9th lord, lagna lord, or vrhaspati and Sani are afflicted the native may be attached to women other than his wife.
63. Kahala yoga -(i)  If the 4th lord and 9th lord are posited in kendra from each other, or (ii) The 4th lord being in his own or exalted house is combined with or aspected by 10th lord this yoga is formed. The yoga makes a man the ruler of many villages, very daring and successful administrator.
64. Malika or Mala yoga - Mala means garland. When planets adorn houses one after another the planets look like a garland, hence the yoga is called Mala or Malika. The seven planets may sit in 7 places one after another from lagna, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th houses etc. Any one of them may be called Mala yoga but they have different results, such as:-
64(i) If from Lagna planets are situated in 7 places one after another the native becomes a king and lord of many horses and elephants.
64(ii) If from the 2nd place planets are seated in 7 houses one after another the native becomes a lord of huge wealth ; he is devoted to his parents, a man of resolute mind, sober, highly meritorious, talented and king of kings.
64(iii) When from the third house the Mala yoga is formed the native is courageous, but he is sickly. But Brihat Jataka says that the native becomes a popular leader and is a handsome person.
64(iv) If the yoga is formed from the 4th house the native becomes a noble-minded man. a very wealthy king having sovereignty over many countries.
64(v) If the yoga is formed from the 5th house the native becomes a king, religiously observes sacrificial rites or for any other religious deeds he is noted as a famous king.
64(vi) If the yoga is formed from the 6th house the native will at least once suffer from penury but at any period of his life he shall earn huge wealth and shall lead a happy life.
64(vii) If the planets one after another are situated from the 7th house, he will be loved by many beautiful wives and shall be a king.
64(viii) If from the 8th house the Mala yoga is formed the native will be a famous man and long lived but he will be poor and a henpecked husband.
64(ix) If Mala yoga is formed from the 9th place the native shall be a highly talented and powerful man engaged in religious austerities.
64(x) If it is from the 10th place the native is engaged in religious austerities, respected by all and is an honest person.
64(xi) If the Malika (Mala) yoga is formed from the 11th house the native is born of a royal family, very efficient and a husband of women of paragon of beauty.
64(xii)  If Mala yoga is formed  from the 12th house the native is very open-handed in spending money and held in high esteem by all.
Besides Mala yoga some authorities mentioned  "Samrata yoga" which is formed when planets occupy all houses beginning from lagna upto the 6th place.  The name of the yoga is quite indicative of its meaning.
65. Samkha yoga - When the lords of the 5th and 6th houses are posited in angular position from each other, or if the lords of lagna and the 10th house occupy cardinal rasis and the 9th lord is strong the yoga is called as Samkha yoga. The native is luxurious, kind-minded, virtuous, learned in many shastras, and orthodox. He observes all religious rites, is a happy man with bis good wife and children and also owns landed property.  His longivity is 81 years.
66. Bhairi yoga - If lagna, 2nd, 7th and 12th places are occupied by planets, the 10th lord is powerful, or Sukra and lagna-lord are posited in a kendra from vrhaspati and the 9th lord is strong the yoga is called "Bhairi". He who has this yoga in his birth chart is born of high family, free from disease, owner of many landed properties, and wealthy, and a noble and mighty man. His wife and children too earn, name and fame and their virtuous deeds give him unmixed joy. The native is an experienced person in wordly affairs.
67. Srinath yoga - If the 7th lord is posited in the 10th place and the 10th lord is in the house of exaltation and is associated with the lord of the 9th house the yoga thus formed is called Srinath yoga. The native having this yoga becomes as powerful as the Lord Indra.
68. Matsa yoga - If the 9th and 5th places are occupied by papa (malefic) and suva (benefic) planets respectively and the 4th or 8th house is associated with malefic planets the yoga is termed as Matsa. The native having this yoga in his chart becomes an astrologer. He is kind-hearted, virtuous, intelligent, educated, talented ano a famous man. This is to be noted that complete yoga as enunciated by different authors is not always found. In many cases the central idea of a yoga is to be considered and the result as indicated by authors will be evident.
69. Lakshmi yoga - If the lord of the 9th house being in his Mooltrikona sign is posited in any kendra or kona from lagna and the lagna-lord is in his exalted house and strong the yoga is. termed as Lakshmi yoga. The native under the influence of this yoga will be king of kings, highly talented, educated, very handsome like "Kandarpa" (lord of love and beauty). He will be respected by kings of many countries and will be blessed with sons.
70. Kurma yoga - If Benefics are in the 5th, 6th and 7th places from lagna and malefics occupy lagna, 3rd and 11th places and those benefic and malefic planets in the navamsa chart occupy their own sign, signs of Mooltrikona or house of exaltation Kurma yoga is formed. The native becomes talented, pious, sober, happy and a public leader. His sweet conduct attracts the attention of the king of the land. One out of many noble deeds of the native is that he always tries to come to rescue his friends in their calamitous days.
71. Parijata yoga - If the lord of the rasi (sign) where lagnalord is situated is posited in any kendra or the navamsa lord of the sign where lagna lord is posited occupies kendra or kona from lagna or he sits in his own, mooltrikona or exalted sign the yoga thus formed is called "Parijata" yoga. This is a brilliant yoga that makes a man a king and master of many horses and elephants. He is a warrior, dignified, dutiful and kind-hearted man. He enjoys happiness at his middle and last stage of life.
72. Kalanidhi yoga - When vrhaspati occupying the 2nd or 5th place from lagna is conjoined with or aspected by Budha or Sukra or occupies the house of budha or Sukra the Kalanidhi yoga is formed. The native under the influence of this yoga is courageous and respected by many and owns many lands and houses and is surrounded by many followers who would look after his comfort. He is free from disease, does not encounter any danger and bas no enemy.

The  following  Rajayogas  are   quoted  from  Sarvartha Chintamani, an authoritative treatise on astrology:

73. If a planet is debilitated and the lord of the rasi of that debilitated planet and also the planet who is exalted in that house are placed in kendra from lagna the native becomes. virtuous and king of kings.
74. If Chandra is situated in any kendra or kona other than lagna and She is aspected by any one of vrhaspati and Sukra the native shall be as fortunate as a king. According to Jataka-Parijat the yoga will be more effective if it is full moon.
75. When a planet is debilitated in the birth-chart but is in the house of exaltation in the navamsa chart the planet may give good result, but if it is otherwise, that is, when an exalted planet in the birth-chart is debilitated in navamsa chart that planet will not be in a position to give favourable result to the native.

The following yogas are basically favourable Rajayogas and they are very effective and may be interesting to common readers.

76. If vrhaspati is in lagna, and Budha is placed in any kendra and aspected by lagnapathi the native will be prosperous like a king.
77. If vrhaspati being in the 7th or in any kona (5th or 9th place ) is aspected by the lagnapatbi the native is as lucky as a king.
78. If Sani is in exalted house or in any kona house and is aspected by the 10th lord the native will be as fortunate as a king.
79. If the 10th lord being in the 8th house is posited in his exalted or friendly sign in navamsa chart or acquires Paravatamsa the native is the lord of kings. A planet when acquires 6 vargas of his own is said to be in "Paravatamsa".
80. If vrhaspati being debilitated is posited in lagna (this means lagna rasi is in makara) or the 9th lord is posited in the 11th house but Vrhaspaihi or the 9th lord is posited in exalted or friendly house in navamsa chart or they acquire Paravatamsa the native becomes king of kings.
81. If Navamsa lord of Chandra and also Budha are placed in kendra from lagna the native shall get the same result as said in previous two yogas.
82. If Chandra in combination with Mangal is posited in the 2nd or 3rd places from lagna and the 5th house is occupied by Rahu the same result will follow.
83. If the navamsa lord of lagna conjoined with 9th lord be posited in the 4th or 5th place the native will be a very great king.
84. If Rahu is in the 10th house, Sani aspected by the 9th lord be in the 11th place and lagna-lord is conjoined with a debilitated planet the native becomes as prosperous as a king.

The following few selected Rajayogas are quoted from Uttara Kalamrita:
85(i)  Relation between the lords of 9th and 10th houses.
85(ii) Relation between the 9th and 10th lords from the 9th house from lagna.
85(iii) Relation between 9th and 10th lords from the 10th place from lagna.
85(iv) Relation among lord of the rasi where Chandra is situated, Chandra-navamsa-lord and Lagnapathi.
85(v) Relation between 9th and 10th lords from Chandra.
85(vi) Relation between 9th and 10th lords from Ravi.
85(vii) Relation among the lords of the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 7th places.
85(viii)	Relation between the lords of the 2nd and 11th houses.

86. The following planets are beneficial :-
86(i) Sukra in the 12th, Budha in the 8th and vrhaspati in the 6th places.
86(ii) The lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th places are beneficial if they are situated in their own, exalted or friendly houses and are aspected by benefics. But if they are posited in inimical house, aspected by or conjoined with enemy planets or combust they are very unfavourable.
86(iii) Natural benefics when posited in kendra, 2nd, 3rd, 5th or 9th places are beneficial ; even benefics in the 6th house is favourable.
86(iv) Natural malefics in Upachayasthana (3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th places are upachayasthanas) are favourable.
86(v) Sani and Ravi in the 9th place is favourable.
86(vi) Sani when posited in his own sign, exalted sign or in the house owned by vrhaspati is favourable, even he is favourable in lagna if it is the house of vrhaspati.
86(vii) It is said that Sukra in the 12th house is favourable but if that 12th house is Sani's sign or Sukra being in the 12tn place be in Sani's house in navamsa chakra is not beneficial.

When a native becomes a millionaire ?

(a) All the seven planets master over different digits, such as Ravi 30 kala, Chandra 16 kala, Mangal 6, Budha 8, vrhaspati 10, Sukra 12 and Sani 1 kala. Now add together the kalas indicated above of the lords of the 9th place from lagna and Chandra.  Divide the sum-total by 12 and the remainder will be the  number of rasi from  the position of Chandra. If that rasi is owned by a benefic planet the native will be multimillionaire.
(b) If any two or more lords of the 2nd, 5th, 9th and 11th houses from Chandra are related to each other by conjunction or aspect and they are aho strong the native will be master of lacs.
(c) If that 9th house from Chandra is occupied by any malefic the native shall get thousand rupees, if that house (where malefic planet is situated) is the exalted sign of that malefic planet the native shall be a multimillionaire.

Let us illustrate this yoga :
Lagna is in makara, 9th place from makara is owned by Budha who masters over 8, Chandra also is in makara. In this case also the 9th lord is Budha. So, 8+8=16 Divide by 12. Remainder is 4. From Chandra the 4th place is Mesa occupied by benefic planet vrhaspati who is exalted in navamsa chart. The native is a very wealthy man.

If those planets are related to the lords of 6th, 8th or 12th houses the native will lose all assets, will be over head and ears in debt and also will be oppressed by his enemies.

87. If all the planets are situated in kendra (from lagna) and there are no planet in Panafar .(2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th houses) and apoklima (3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th houses) benefic planets are strong and full moon is not conjoined with or aspected by any malefic the native becomes a king or very infiuential public leader.
88. If any native is born within 2 dandas after noon or midnight then he shall vanquish all his opponents and shall become an emperor. He will be highly educated, pious and devoted to religious austerities. Again if in the birth-chart of that native any exalted planet is situated in the 2nd place from lagna, he will possess huge wealth. If that planet in the 2nd house is not exalted the native will be a moneyed man only, Here midday (i.e. noon) or midnight is to be calculated according to equation of time. We generally take noon hours when our clock strikes 12, if we calculate 12 hours according to equation of time it may not agree with hours as shown by our clock.
   
Yogas that make man educated and learned :

There is a difference between education and learning. When we say that a man is educated we mean that he has acquired knowledge in any branch of literature or science. This he can obtain through studies in school, college etc. When it is said that he is a learned man, which is termed as Vidya in Sanskrit we mean that he has acquired Jnana-knowledge of the supreme being, knowledge that gives us the clear idea of truth, truth of eternal bliss that may be obtained through meditation and by deep introspection. Here we shall mostly deal with education that is obtained through scholarship, experience and observation.

Budha stands for education and vrhaspati is the only planet that gives us learning, Jnana or real Vidya by which we acquire the knowledge of existence of God. Again, vrhaspati also helps a native acquire University education. Sukra also is a karaka of fine arts and an adjutant Budha. Similarly, fifth house stands for Vidya in general and education in particular that we obtain from schools and colleges and it is to be determined from Budha in general.

89. If the lord of the 4th house, vrhaspati, Budha and Sukra are posited in their own or exalted houses and be placed in kendra or kona  the native becomes highly educated, learned, fortunate and popular.  But if they are situated in malefic houses. (6th, 8th or 12th place) combust, aspected by or conjoined with enemy or malefic planets gC1od effect may be nullified or minimised.
90. Second house also stands for such education through which a man earns his livelihood. So, if the lords of 2nd, 11th and lagna together are situated in the 2nd or 11th house the native not only may get good money but also acquire practical education that will help him earn a lot of money.
91. If Budha and Sukra are placed in the 10th place from Chandra the native may acquire nigher education, he becomes wealthy and is blessed with a good wife.
91(i) Similar result may be obtained if from Chandra vrhaspati and Sukra are posited in the 10th place. The native over and above the favourable result referred to above will be the protector of religion enumerated by Brabmins.
92. If Ravi, Chandra and Budha are seated together the native earns name and fame for his education.
93. Combination of Ravi, Chandra and vrhaspati or Ravi, Budha and vrhaspati or Ravi, Budha and Sukra is really a brilliant yoga that makes a man highly educated, learned and wise. He is widely known as a highly educated and learned man.  This is also to be noted that Budha in the 11th house gives a man high education and keen intellect.
94. If lagna is occupied by Budha or lord of the 2nd house or the lord of lagna is situated in the 2nd house and the 2nd house and its lord or lagnapathi or Budha is associated with or aspected by any benefic the native will be renowned for hi education.
95. If Budha and vrhaspati being associated with Sukra are posited in the 9th house the native is not only renowned for his education but also is endowed with many qualities of head and heart.
95(i) If Budha and vrhaspati being in the 9th house are conjoined with Sani the native is also a good orator.
96. If vrhaspati while positing in the 9th house is aspected by Chandra and Sani the native will be a very talented man and will be an expert in an1ysing and explaining correctly the legal problems of foreign land.
97. Again if vrhaspati occupying the 9th house is aspected by Budha and Sukra the native will be profoundly learned.
The above yogas are quoted from Jataka-Parijat.

The yogas that make a man astrologer and mathematician :
98. If the 2nd house is occupied by Ravi and Budha, the native becomes an astrologer and if those planets are aspected by Sani he will be a mathematician.
99. When Chandra and Mangal are aspected by Budha and occupy the 2nd house the native becomes a mathematician.
99(i) If any kendra is occupied by Budha and Chandra and Mangal are in the 2nd place.
99(ii) If  Budha being exalted  is posited in the 2nd  house. Lagna is occupied by vrhaspati and Sani is posited in 8th place from lagna,
99(iii) If Sukra  is in the house of exaltation, and vrhaspati occupies kendra or kona position,
99(iv) If Budha is in the 2nd place from lagna, and vrhaspati, is situated in any kendra or kona, The native becomes very much efficient in mathematics.
99(v) If Ravi and Budha together are posited in kendra, kona or 11th place the native becomes efficient in mathematics. The planets should be powerful.

Yoga that makes a man scientist :

100. The native becomes versatile in many shastras if Chandra and Budha together are situated in any favourable place. He will specially be educated in many branches of science. The yoga will be very effective if Chandra and Budha are in the 9th place from lagna.
101. If the planets occupying the 2nd, 4th, 5th and 10th houses and lords of lagna, 9th and 10th houses are strong in Sada-varga  the native becomes  profoundly  learned in many shastras. He acquires profound knowledge in science and of Veda-Vedanga. The native having this excellent yoga in his birth-chart will be known in the world as a mine of education.
102. If Ravi, Budha and Sukra are situated in the 2nd place and be strong the native becomes a poet. Consult Rabindranath's horoscope.
103. If the lord of drekkansthan of the 5th lord or the karaka planet (vrhaspati and Budha) is a naturally favourable plan to be posited in any kendra or kona and aspected by karaka planet or by any favourable planet the native can understand the inner meaning of any hint or suggestion. Budha and vrhaspati are natural indicator of intellect.
103(i) The same effect is indicated if Rahu is in the 5th place from lagna.
104. If the 2nd place is occupied by powerful vrhaspati specially if he is posited in his own house or exalted house, the native shall be proficiently learned in Veda and Vedanga and is held in high esteem hy all great Pandits of the country.

Conveyances

Maharshi Parasara and other authors of astrological treatise laid down much stress on Sukra as the principal significator of conveyance. Next comes the lord of the 4th house. So, Maharsi Parasara says :-
105. If Sukra in conjunction with the lord of the 4th house occupies the 4th place from Lagna, or if the 4th lord being in the 4th house or in the house of exaltation casts bis aspect over Sukra the native will possess excellent conveyance.
106. If Ravi occupies the 4th house and the 4th lord happens to be in the highest exaltation point and is conjoined with Sukra the native gets conveyance of his own at the age of 32 years.
107. If the 4th lord being in the highest exaltation point is combined with the lord of 10th house the native shall own conveyance at his 42 years of age.
108. If 4th lord in conjunction with vrhaspati occupies lagna the native has various kinds of conveyances, such as motor car, horse, elephant etc.
109. If the 11th lord is in the 4th house and the 4th lord in the 11th place from lagna the native shall  own conveyance at his 12 years of age.
110.  If strong 4th lord is conjoined with a benefic or the lord of the 9th  house the native becomes lord of many countries and he has various kinds of conveyances. [This is to be noted that the 4th lord and the benefic planet referred to above or the 9th lord who are conjoined with the lord of the 4th house must be powerful and occupy a favourable place. Otherwise the result will not be very effective].
111. When the 4th lord is in a kendra and the lord of that kendra occupies lagna or the 10th lord is in lagna and lagnapathi is in the 10th house the native owns a number of conveyances.
112. If the 4th lord is posited in the house owned by Mangal, lagna is occupied by a benefic and a favourable planet is situated in lagna the native will be a king and he shall be an owner of many conveyances besides wealth and jewels.
113. If the 2nd lord is in lagna and the lord of the 10th house is posited in the 2nd house the native shall possess many conveyances.
114. If the 12th lord being in the house of exaltation is conjoined with the lord of the 2nd house and the 9th lord casts his full aspect on them the native will possess conveyance.
115. When the 10th lord is in the 4th place, the 4th lord in the 11th, and lagna receives the aspect of a favourable planet the native owns many conveyances.

Ownership of Houses

116. If the lord of the 4th house conjoined with lagnapathi occupies the 4th place the native will have a house of his own. If these two planets occupy any unfavourable place (such as 6th, 8th or 12th place) there is possibility of loss of the house.
117. If the lord of either lagna or the 4th place in combination with a benefic is posited in kendra or kona the native will have a house of his own.
118. If the 4th lord in conjunction with the lord of the 10th place occupies any kendra or kona the native shall own a palatial building enclosed with beautiful wall.
119. If the lord of navamsa of the 4th lord and the lord of rasi where that navamsa lord is posited and both of them are situated in a kendra the native will have a house of his own.
120. If the 4th house is conjoined with an exalted planet, the 9th lord is in a kendra and the lord of the 4th house is placed in his exalted or friendly house the native may have many beautiful houses of his own. (i) Maharshi Parasara says, if the 4th house, 4th lord and the karaka planet are posited in cardinal house the native may build many houses in many places.
121. If the third place is associated with a benefic planet and the 4th lord occupies his own house the native shall have a beautiful house of his own enclosed with wall.

Prabrajya or Sannyas yoga ( religious mendicancy )

122. When the 10th lord being conjoined with 4 planets be placed in any kendra or kona the yoga is termed as Prabrajya or Sannyas. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu ??
123. Only 4 planets together when occupy any kendra may cause Sannyas yoga.
124. If Sani is aspected by the lord of lagna or he has aspect on the latter ( lord of lagna ) and no other planet has aspect on lagnapathi or Sani unaspected by any planet casts his aspect on lagna-lord and both lagna-lord and Sani are weak it is Sannyas yoga.
125. When Chandra falls in the drekkan or navamsa of Sani or Mangal and is aspected by Sani it makes a man Sannyari.
The yogas no. 124. and 125 have three conditions to effect Sannyas yoga. (i) Chandra should be in either Sani"s drekkan or in the navamsa of Sani or Mangal and Chandra receives aspect of no other planet than Sani. (ii) Sani and lagnapathi will be weak. {iii) Further Sani will have full aspect on lagna lord. 
126. If Lagna rises in any of the houses owned by Mangal, vrhaspati or Sani and vrhaspati is posited in the house of luck and also there are rajayogas in the birth chart the native visits many holy shrines and for bis sacred and religious deeds he becomes widely known in the world.
127. If Chandra unaspected by any planet be posited in either 9th or 10th house from lagna the native in spite of powerful rajayoga in the chart becomes a person of great reputation only after be embraces 'Sannyas dharma'. Here "aspect'' should be construed as "full aspect".
128. If vrhaspati is posited in the 9th and lagna, Chandra and vrhaspati are aspected by Sani the native preaches a new religious doctrine and earns great name and fame. (The result as said above will be very effective provided the chart contains powerful rajayoga).
129. If Sani is posited in the 9th and is not aspected by any other planet and also there are powerful rajayogas in the birth chart the  native becomes a Sannyasi and his greatness as a man is widely known throughout the world  and afterwards he enjoys all the beneficial results of rajayogas.
130. When the following planets be strong and are posited together in 'Sama' (even) rasi the native becomes a devoted ascetic leading true religious life. (Vrsa, Karkata, Kanya, Vrscika, makara and Mina -- these six rasis are Sama or even rasis)
130(i) Ravi, Mangal, Sukra and Sani.
130(ii) vrhaspati, Mangal, Ravi and Sani.  
130(iii) Chandra, Mangal, vrhaspati and Sani.
131. If Ravi, Chandra, mangal, vrhaspati and Sukra these 5 planets together are associated with Budha or Sani the native becomes an ascetic and his eyesight is so sharp that he can see and identify very easily and accurately even a very small things from a great distance.
132. The  following combination  of planets make a man 'Sannyasi' :
132(i) Mangal, Ravi, Chandra, Sani and vrhaspati.
132(ii) Mangal, Ravi, Budha, Sani and Sukra.
132(iii) mangal, Chandra, Ravi, Sukra and Sani.
132(iv) Mangal, Ravi, Sukra, Sani and vrhaspati.
132(v) Mangal, Chandra, Budha, Sukra and Sani.

When Sannyas yogas are to be taken as defunct ?

133. When yogakaraka planet or planets are associated with Rahu, Ketu or Gulik and he (or they - yogakaraka planets) is posited in a malefic navamsa then the native abandons the life of asceticism and is considered as a renegade by people at large. (Only association of Rahu, Ketu or Gulik with yogakaraka  planets will not nullify the sacred effect of asceticism. The yogakarakas must be positioned also in malefic navamsa).
134. If the yogakaraka planet or planets in spite of their strength be sunk down by the Sun's rays or be combust the native holds greatest regard for 'Sannyas dharma' but he cannot be a 'Sannyasi'.
135. When  yogakaraka  planets are overpowered  by other planets the native cannot embrace 'Sannyas dharma' in spite of aspect of beneficial planet on the yogakarakas.

Yogas of glorious and virtuous deeds :
136. When the 10th lord, lord of the 2nd and Budha are powerful the native performs sacrificial rites.
137. If the 10th place is occupied by Budha and the 10th lord is not aspected by or conjoined with a malefic but is aspected by a benefic the native performs sacrificial rites.
138. If the 10th lord Budha is in the house of exaltation or be in the 9th house from lagna but not in conjunction with Rahu or Ketu the same result may be predicted.
139. If the 10th lord is exalted and aspected by Budha or the 10th lord being in his own house is aspected by a favourable planet the native performs sacrificial rites.
140. If Chandra occupies Karkata rasi (cancer-sign) and is aspected by vrhaspati and Sukra the native earns name and fame for his glorious deeds.
141. This is also a yoga of virtuous deeds if Chandra acquires Paravat Varga (when a planet attains 6 Vargas of his own is said to be in Paravatamsa).
142. A person becomes famous for his glorious deeds if in his birth chart 10th lord conjoined with a benefic is situated in a favourable navamsa or is posited between benefics.
143. If the 10th lord is a natural benefic and be posited in the house of exaltation, his own or friendly house or friendly navamsa the native earns name and fame for his glorious deeds.
144. When the lord of Lagna is strong, lord of luck is situated in Simha rasi in navamsa chakra and lord of the 10th house acquires Devalokavarga (acquiring 7 vargas of a planet's own sign) the native becomes a famous man for his meritorious and virtuous deeds and is greatly adored by all.
(In spite of all these yogas if Ravi and Sani together are situated in the 10th house and are aspected by or conjoined with a malefic or seated in a malefic navamsa the native loses his name and fame for his misdeeds and is decried by all).

Taking bath in holy river or sea :
Hindus consider the following rivers and sea as holy stream  - They are The Ganges of Prayag and Kalighat, Sindhu (Indus river), Yamuna, Rameswar Setu Banda, Sagara-Sangama.
145. When full moon is in the watery sign, vrhaspati is in the 10th house the native shall have bath in any of these holy streams.
146. Similar result happens if the 12th place is occupied by Budha and the 12th lord is seated in the house of exaltation.
147. If the 9th lord being in the watery sign be posited in any kendra from lagna the native shall have bath in holy water.
148. Chandra  being associated  witll a benefic if posited in the 3rd house from lagna the native shall have bath in holy water.

The yogas that make a man an Orator or eloquent speaker :
149. If the natural benefic be the lord of the 2nd house and is situated in any kendra or kona and is aspected by or associated with a benefic planet the native may be an eloquent speaker.
150. When the 2nd lord be in his highest exaltation point or acquires 'Paravata varga the yoga makes a man an excellent orator.
151. Similarly the navamsa lord of the lord of the 2nd house if associated with a benefic is in his highest point of exaltation or acquires Gapur varga (a planet acquiring 4 vargas of his own) makes a native good orator.
152. When Budha being in Vargottama navamsa be in conjunction  with vrhaspati who acquires  Simhasana varga ( a planet acquiring 5 vargas of his own ) slso makes a native very great speaker.
The following configuration of planets make a native a good orator:
153(i)	When the 2nd lord is conjoined with a benefic or be in Vargottoma navamsa.
153(ii) If the 4th lord associated with vrhaspati acquires Paravat varga.
153(iii) When Chandra and Budha together are situated in the 9th house.
This is also to be noted that the second house signifies mouth as well as power of speech. Similarly Budha and vrhaspati primarily are significators of speech. Therefore when these two planets along with the 2nd lord are powerfully posited the native must be a good orator, a fluent speaker and pleasant conversationalist.

CHAPTER XV

ASTHA VARGA SYSTEM
----------------------------------
deleted pages 320 - 342
----------------------------------

CHAPTER XVI

DISEASES
-----------------------------
pages 343 - 377 deleted
-----------------------------
CHAPTER XVII
When Rajayogas are ineffective ?
[ Rajayogas here include Dhanayoga (wealth giving yoga). good academic career, yogas that bring about fortune, high position in society and professiona1 career, popularrity,name and fame etc. In the following paragraphs most oft.he yogas mentioned will be taken to be unfavourable and their mftlefic effect may mar the excellent  result of Raja yogas. Besides them a few unfavourable yogas such as extinction of lineage, illiteracy, beggary etc, will he explained]

234. If at birth Ravi posited in Mesa rasi (which is his house of exaltation) occupies Tula rasi in Navamsa chart and is aspected by an unfavnurable planet the native becomes penniless.
234(i) Similarly if in the birth-chart Sukra occupying Kanya rasi be in the lowest debilitated position and being in the same rasi in Navamsa chart she is aspected by a malefic the same result of penury is apprehended. (Sukra's highest exalted position is 27°degree in Mina rasi and 27° degree in Kanya rasi is her lowest debilitated position. Ravi's higest exalted position is 10° degree in Mesa rasi and lowest debiiitated position is 10° degree in Tula rasi. So, malefic nsult referred to above two yogas are not expected to be effective if the aforesaid planets be not in their debilitated positions in navamsa rasi.)

The yoga that ruakes a man a beggar.
235. In case of makara lagna if in the 10th house Ravi is situated in his lowest debilitated position (that is, 10° degree in Tula} or he is in Tula rasi in Navamsa chart the native lives on alms.
A few more yogas of beggary :
235(i) If Chandra in the 4th house from lagna is posited in her lowest debilitated position and is aspected by a malefic.
235(ii) If Mangal in the 8th house from lagna is posited in his lowest debilitated position and is aspected by a malefic the native under the aforesaid yogas anyhow manages his livelihood by begging. ( Chandra's highest exalted position is 3° degree Vrsa and 3° degree Vrscika rasi is her lowest debilitated position. Mangal's highest exalted position is 28° degree in makara rasi 2nd 28° degree in Karkata rasi is his lowest debilitated position.)
235(iii) Similarly Budha in the 7th place from lagna is posited in his lowest debilitated position, i.e. 15° degree in Mina rasi and is aspected by a malefic.
235(iv) vrhaspati being in his lowest debilitated position in makara rasi (5° degree in makara rasil receives the aspect of an unfavourable planet.
236(v) Sukra in the 5th house from lagna be in the lowest debilitated position and is aspected by a malefic.
236(vi) Sani in the 2nd house from lagna be in the lowest debilitated position in Mesa rasi and is aspected by a malefic.
Under the aforesaid yogas which are considered to be very unfavourable the native suffers from poverty and has to live on alms.

236. If Sani without receiving aspect of any favourable planet be in lagna or in any other angular position the native may be a beggar.
236(i) If Sani, Chandra and Ravi together be in any kendra the native becomes a dullard and a beggar.
236(ii) If Chandra in conjunction with Mangal is posited in Mesa rasi and receives the aspect of Ravi and is not aspected by any favourahle planet the native will be a beggar.
217. While Chandra cccupies lagna, Sani in any kendra from lagna and vrhaspati is situated in the 12th place the native is forsaken by his own men, expelled from his house and is to live on alms.
217(i) If the lord of luck (9th house1 is in the 12th place and kendras are occupied by malefics the native is addicted to sinful acts and lives at others' expense just like a parasite.
238. If the lord of the 9th is in the 12th, the 12th lord is in the 2nd and the 3rd house is occupied by unfavourable planets the native is attacked with hernia. He is mean-minded, immoral and beccmes a beggar.
239. If the 10th house is not occupied by any planet, and most of the planets are either in their inimical houses or in their houses of debilitation the native is illiterate, short-tempered and a beggar. He is without wife and children.
240. If vrhaspati in conjunction with Rahu or Ketu is aspected by an unfavourable planet the native is mean, or is enaged in heinous activities. He is selfish and a liar.
241. If vrhaspati is posited in the house of debilitation and is aspected by any other planet from his debilitated house the native indulges in heinous acts iaspite of his best pedegree.
This yoga is possible in the following manner :
241(i) vrhaspati in makara, and Mangal in Karkata.
241(ii) vrhaspati in makara, and Sani in Mesa.
All the veteran astrologers spoke highly of 'Nicha-Vanga Rajyog".	If the yoga stated above are so unfavourable then "Nich-Vanga Raja yoga" has no meaning at all. (When vrhaspati is in makara and Mangal is in Karkata it is Nicha-Vanga Rajayoga and they from their debilitated houses are aspecting each other. Probably the author of Sarvartha Chintamony is correct when he pointed out that the aforesaid yogas will be unfavourable only when vrhaspati is in conjunction with or is nspected by any other unfavourable planet other than the planet in debilitation that aspects vrhaspati.
242. If the lord of lagna is in the 12th place and Chandra in conjunction with Mangal is situated in any unfavourabie rasi the native suffers from poverty in a foreign land. But Sarvartha Chintamony is of the opinion that this yoga will be very malefic provided Chandra and Mangal in conjunction with a "Krura" planet be posited in the 10th place from lagna and the lord of lagna is in the 12th house.

Extinction of Family lineage

243. If the lord of the 9th is posited in the 12th house, lagnapathi and lord of janmarasi remain unaspected by any favourable planet, the native shall have no issue and his family line shall be extinct.
244. If Kendra (or Kendras) is occupied by both benefic and malefic planets and	Chandra	occupying Sani's  navamsa is aspected by the lord of lagna the yoga causes extinction of family line.
244(i)  Similar result is apprehended when the 7tn  house  from Chandra is occupied by Budha and Sukra, vrhaspati is in the 5th place from lagna, and the 4th and 8th houses (from lagna) are occupied by malefic planets.
244(ii) Again the following configuration of planets gives the same result. Such as:  Chandra is in the 10th, vrhaspati in the 7th and a malefic planet is situated in the 9th house.

When a native  considered a disgrace to the family ?
245. If Chandra, Budha and Sukra are situated in angular position and Rahu is in Lagna the nat1ve becomes unscrupulous and is a disgrace to his family. According to Saravali, an important book on Astrology conjunction of Chandra, Budha and Sukra makes a man highly educated and cultured but in spite of these qualitits the man is mean, greedy and unscrupulous.
246.  If the  6th, the 8th and 12th places from the 5th house (that is, the 10th, the 12th and the 4th house from lagna) are occupied by malefics or Chandra and vrhaspati are situated tn lagna and 7th house is posited by Sani and Mangal the native becomes poor and creates a discord among own men for which he is hated by all.
247. The  native is considered a disgrace to his family under the following yogas :
247(i)  When the 4th house is occupied by all the malefic planets.
247(ii) When lagna, the 5th, 8th and 12th  houses are occupied by malefics.
247(iii) When all inauspicious planets are  situated in lagna, the 8th and the 12th house.
247(iv)  When malefic planet or planets are in lagna, Chandra is in the 4th, the 5th place 1s occupied by vrhaspati and the lord or the 5th house is weak.
247(v) When Sukra in combination with a malefic is in the 4th house, Budha in the 7th, vrhaspati in the 5th and Chandra in conjunction with a malefic is in the 8th place from lagna.
247(vi) When lagna is occupied by waning Moon, and combust vrhaspati is situated in the rasi owned by Sani.

Rekha yoga :

This is one of the worst yogas as described in Jataka Parijat. A person born under this yoga,as if he bas no right to live in society as a man. For he has neither knowledge nor wealth. He suffers from extreme poverty, he is lustful and wrathful. He is filthy has no grace and always picks up quarrel with others. He shows disregard to gods and brahmins. It is almost a verbatim translatinn of Sloka No. 26, Ch. VI of Jaraka Parijat. I donot know why it is termed as Rekha yoga. 'Preshya' (Servitude), 'Kemadruma' (daridra) yogas also come under this yoga. Some commentators are of the opinion that Rekha yogas mar the beneficial effect of Raja yogas.
248.(i) If the lord of lagna is weak and aspected by the 8th lord and vrhaspati is scorched by Sun's rays it is Rekha yoga.
248.(ii) When the lord of Navamsa of the 4th lord is obscured by Sun's rays and aspected by the lord of the 12th place it is Rekha yoga.
248.(iii) When the 4th lord is conjoined with the 6th lord, the lord of the 9th house in combination with the lord of the 8th house is posited in the 5th house and the lord of lagna is weak it is Rekha yoga.
248(iv) When benefics are in dusthanas (6th, 8tb and 12th houses), malefics in kendra and kona positions and the lord of the 11th house is weak it is Rekha yoga.
248(v) If the 9th lord is scorched by Sun's rays, the lords of lagna and dhana (2nd place) are posited in their debilitated houses it is Rekha yoga.
248(vi) If any 3 planets are obscured by Sun's rays or they are situated in their own debilitated houses and the lords of lagna is either weak or placed in any dusthana (6th, 8th and 12th places) 1t is Rekha yoga.
248(vii) If malefic planets are either debilitated or aspected by planets posited in their inimical houses and are placed in lagna, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 9th, 10th or 11th houses it is Rekha yoga.

The Yogas that indicate Poverty

( These yogas of poverty are described here in addition to those narrated earlier)
249. lf any one of vrhaspati, Mangal, Sani and Budha be in his house of depression or obscured by sun s rays and is placed in 5th, 6th, 8th, 11th  or 12th house the native not only suffers from financial distress but also has to live on alms.
250. When Sani being placed in the 6th house is aspected by an unfavourable planet and Ravi and Budha occupy lagna the native is poverty stricken and is to live on alms.
251. If Mangal, Budha, vrhaspati, Sukra and Sani are posited in the 5th, 6th, 8th, 10th and 12th places respectively and lord of the 12th house is debilitated or either combust, scorched or obscured  by sun's rays and the lord of lagna is without strength the native suffers from poverty and has no other means to maintain his livelihood than begging. Here all the 5 planets may not be posited in the manner stated in the above sloka but when majority of them are situated in most of the bhavas stated above, lagna-lord is weak, the lord of the 12th house is debilitated and Combust or scorched by sun's rays unfavourable results indicated in the sloka are expected to occur.
252. If Chandra, Mangal, vrhaspati and Sukrd are situated in any four bhavas out of the 5th, 7th, 9th, 10th and 11th the native shall be very poor, or,(i)  When debilitated Sukra is posited in lagna, the 5th house is occupied by vrhaspati being in his house of depression, debilitated Mangal in the 11th and Chandra in her house of depression occupies the 3rd place the person having such a yoga will definitely be penniless.
253. If lagnas both in  birth and navamsa charts fall  in cardinal signs and vrhaspati other than  his own  sign is posited in the 6th or 12tn house the native shall be poor and a beggar.
254. In case of birth at night if lagna rises in cardinal sign, (chara rasi), favourable planets are weak and posited in kendra and kona, and malefic planets occupy those bhava other than kendra the native is sure to live on alms.

The following yogas are quoted from Hora Ratna (author is Yannacharya) :

255. When the lord of lagna in association with a malefic is posited in the 12th house or benefic planets are obscured by sun's rays the native becomes penniless.
256. If inauspicious planets are placed in kendra and benefic planet are weak and obscured by sun's rays the native becomes imbecile and poor.
257. If the  lord of  lagna  is  posited  in  the  8th house (particularly when he is obscured by sun's rays) the 10th lord in the 6th and the lord of the 2nd house is in the 12th place the native will be poor.
258. When lords of lagna and the 7th house are in the 6th, the 5th place is occupied by a strong malefic and vrhaspati and Sukra are obscured by sun's rays the native is penniless and distressed.
259. If the lagna-lord  be in the  6th and the lord of the 2nd house associated with or aspected by "Krura", (very malefic) planets is situated in the 8th place the native is poor	and imbecile.
260. If the 2nd  house is associated with and aspectrd by a malefic and the lord thereof is conjoined with Ravi the native will be poor.
261. If  the  lord of the 2nd house  is  in conjunction with malefics and obscured by sun's rays even  if  the 2nd house is occupied by auspicious planets or
262. If favourable planets occupying the 6th and the 11th houses and the lord of the 2nd house is sunk down by sun's rays the native will be poor.
263.  This also betrays poverty as and when both the lagna lords of the birth and navamsa charts being combined  with the 10th lord  and a1so the lord of the 2nd house being associated with unfavourable planets are posited in the 6th house and the 2nd house is occupied by malefic planets.
264. If the 2nd house is occupied and aspected by inauspicious planets and the lord of the 2nd house is placed in the 3rd the native becomes poor.
265. When the 2nd house and four kendras are occupied by malefic planets not only the native himself will be poverty stricken but also his kith and kin born in the family is bereft of wealth.
266. If Ravi, Sukra and Sani together be posited in any bhava a wealthy person also under this yoga will be poor, but when Mesa or Simha Rasi is occupied by these three planets and conjoined with Budha and aspected by vrhaspati the native becomes a very wealthy man.
267. If Chandra, Mangal, Sukra and Sani  together  are posited in any bhava even a wealthy man under this yoga becomes poor.
268. When the 10th place from lagna, 11th place from Ravi and 8th place from Chandra are not occupied by any planet the yoga produces poverty.
269. If the 2nd house is posited by a debilitated, combust and krura planet and the lords of the 2nd and 11th houses are conjoined with unfavourable planets the native becomes poor.
270. When favourable planet be in dusthanas ( 6th, 8th and 12th places) and unfavourable planets are in Kendra or Kona the native any how is capable of managing his two meals but it is very difficult for him to get money to purchase his clothings.

The following yogas of poverty are qaoted from 'Laghu Parasari':
271. If lagnapathi is in the 12th and  the 12th lord is in Lagna and the latter is aspected by or conjoined with a "maraka" planet it is a yoga of poverty.
272. If there is an exchange of planets between lagnalord and lord of the 6th house and they are aspected by a "maraka" planet the native born with a silver spoon in his mouth becomes poor.
273. When  lagna  and/or  Chandra  are  aaaociated  with Ketu and the lord or lagna is placed in the 8th and aspected by or conjoined with a maraka planet the yoaga produces poverty.
274. If lagnapathi is conjoined with the lord of the 6th, 8th or 12th house and is aspected by an inauspicious planet the native will be poor. Even the aspect on lagnapathi by the lord of the 5th or 9th house will not mitigate the ill effect of poverty, but if the said lagnapathi receives no aspect of the lord of the 5th or 9th house the native shall be very poor.
275. If the lord of the 4th is in the 6th and the lord of the 9th is in the 10th house but aspected by a maraka planet the person having such a yoga shall be poor.
276. When an unfavourable planet aspected by or conjoined with a maraka planet be posited in lagna and lagna is not occupied by the lord of the 9th or 10th house it is a yoga that betrays poverty.
277. lf the lord of any bhava exchanges places with the lord of the 6th, the 8th or the 12th house and is aspected by any unfavourable planet particularly Sani the native bocomes poor.
278. If the lord of Navamsa of the lord of Janmarasi ( i. e. where Chandra is posited} is associated with a  maraka  planet or be posited in maraka-sthana the yoga produces poverty.
279. When the Navamsa-lord of lagnapathi posited in dusthana is conjoined with or aspected by any "maraka" planet the yoga produces poverty.
280. It is a  yoga of  destruction  of "Dhana" yoga when Chandra and Mangal are in the 2nd place from lagna.
280(i) It is also a yoga of poverty if Ravi being in the 2nd house is aspected by Sani but when Ravi is not aspected by Sani the native will be very rich.
280(ii) Again if Sani aspected by Budha is posited in the 2nd house the native owns great wealth.
281. If vrhaspati being in the 2nd house is aspected by Budha the native becomes poor.
282. Budha when aspected by Chandra and posited in the house of wealth makes a man pauper.

The following yogas of poverty are quoted from 'Sarvartha Chintamony' :
283. If lagnapathi is weak and associated with an unfavourable planet posited in the 12th and the lord of the 2nd house is associated with Ravi and aspected by a malefic, or be  in the house of depression the native incurs displeasure of the Government and looses money.
283(i) Similar result is apprehended if that 12th lord is in the 2nd, the lord of the 11th house is in the 12th and the lord of the 2nd is in any dusthana or posited in his debilitated house.
284 If the 2nd lord conjoined with Ravi or the 10th lord is situated in the 12th or in his debilitated house and also combined with an unfavourable planet the native looses money owing to displeasure of the Government.
284(i) If the lagnapathi combined with a malefic be posited in the 8th place similar results noted above is apprehended.
285. If the lord of any dusthana is aspected by Mangal, the lord of the 11th house is in the Navamsa of an inauspicious planet, weak or conjoined with an unfavourable planet and aspected by or combined with the 3rd lord, the native looses money due to activities of thieves or fire or he may loose money owing to punishment inflicted by the Government of the land.
286. The native becomes poor if the Navamsa lord of the dhanapathi (lord of the 2nd house) is situated in any dusthana, combined with a malefic or placed in "Krura" Sastyamsa.
287. If the Navamsa lord of lagna is an unfavourable planet, associated with the lord of the 2nd house, posited in any dusthana and at the same time conjoined with or aspected by the lagna lord, the native has to loose money due to fire, activities of thieves or wrath of the Government.
288.  The native is poverty-stricken if the 2nd house, its lord and the lord of the 11th house are in conjunction with malefics.
289. When Ravi being associated with an unfavourable planet is weak or debilitated and is in conjunction with the 12th lord or lord of Navamsa of lagna and is also aspected by the lord of the 2nd house the native becomes poor.
290. If the Dhanapathi (lord of the 2nd house) is in "Krura" Sastyamsa and is placed in any kendra or kona or associated with debilitated Ravi the native has meagre income.
290(i) Similar result is expected when the 11th lord is posited in "Krura" Sastyamsa and is not aspected by either vrhaspati or Sukra.

The following yogas of poverty are quoted from 'Bbavartha Ratnakar':

291. If the lords of the 4th, 9th and lagna are posited in the 2nd house the native suffers from penury till his death. [I have no experience of such a yoga giving such an unlucky result and wby the yoga shall impart such a bad result can not be reasonably explained.]
292.(i) It is a yoga of poverty if the 2nd lord is in the 12th and the 12th lord in the 2nd.
292.(ii) It is a yoga of poverty if the 2nd lord is in the 12th and the 12th lord in lagna.
292.(iii) It is a yoga of poverty if the 5th lord is in the 6th and the 9th lord in the 8th.
292.(iv) It is a yoga of poverty ir the 4th lord along with the lord of the 9th place is posited in the 8th, or the lords of the 4th and lagna or the lords of lagna and the 9th house  are posited in the 8th.
292(v) When these three Bhavas viz., the 4th, 9th and lagna are associated with unfavourable planet or the Navamsa lords of these Bhavas are conjoined with the lord of the 8th, or lord of the 6th or 12th house cast aspect on those Navamsa lords the native shall suffer from extreme poverty.

------------
  deleted
------------------------
A few Daridra and other unfavourable yogas : ( According to Vrihat Jataka Chandrika)
deleted
-----------------------------------------------------
deleted page 391 ... till end
-----------------------------------------------------


------------------------------------------------------------
variations
1. Names of Graha / Planets
2. Names of Nakshatras
3. Lagnapati, lagnadhipathi
Vrhaspati Vrbaspati
Vrsa, mithuna, -a
kendrapathi and konapathi.

For each Graha and Lord, clearly establish whether he is strong, weak, afflicted, well-positioned, aspected by which graha / lord and conjunct with which graha/lord