HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE


By
HARIHAR MAJUMDER, Jyotishshastri
B. A. LL. B. (Ca/.), A. C. I. I. (Lond,)

On AsrnoLOGY
in Bengali language



I.	PHALIT NOTISH (PART-I)
2. PHALIT NOTISH (PART-II)
3. NOTISH JOGA-SANCHAYAN
4. BHABARTHA RATNAKAR
5. BRIHAT PARASARI HORA (PART-I)
6. BRIHAT PARASARI HORA (PART-II)

HARIHAR MAJUMDER

HINDU SCIENCE OFTHE FUTURE







Write or visit for ,
Books on Astr9logy Palmistry & Tantra-Mantra etc	ed
E,  j  1
Telephone , 327 88 35

Publisher
R. K. Saha
Puthipatra (Calcutta) Private Limited 9 Anthony Bagan Lane
Calcutta 700 009






First Published, April 1981 Reprinted, September 1983 Revised Print, January 2000









Printed By
Bhaswati Printing Creek Row, Calcutta.









Price Rs. 200.00

Foreword
   In our lime, the study of astrology was limited to only a certain section of people who were profound scholars and who studied deeply the various branches of Indian common philosophy of which astrology is one. There was another section of pe(iple who were professionals in the truest sense of the term and earned their livelihood through this profession ; their methods of prediction were kept as trade secrets and common people who were interested in studying this subject obtained little help from these professionals whom people ot rural areas called acharyaj and held in high esteem, Due to their conserva­ tive habit many branches of astrology and palmistry have been dying. Of these branches we may mention a few, such as horary astrology and the method of finding out birth particulara from the palm.
   Apart from the aforementioned scholars and professionals in thoae d,ys others showed little interest in the study of this subject. But this attitude is now completely changed, Youn.11 men and women of the. present generation are taking great interest in studying and understanding the basic concepts of astrology and their application in making astrological forecasts. This is evident from the very large number of astrological books and periodicals in different Indian and Western lan1uages which are available in the market.
   To a beginner as well as to an advanced student of astrology the most difficult problem is to assimilate the basic concepts, because in doing so, they find that some sutraa appear to be contradicted by others and students arc puzzled and fail to take lo"'ical approach to the understanding of the subiect.
   In fact the difficulty can only be avoided by adopting the correct methodology in the study of  the subject, It must be admitted that astrology is a science and like the study of other sciences it must be based on systematisation. Mere compilation of the contents from classical texts provides little a11i1tance to an astrologer or to a researcher in astrology. I have

viii
been a sincere stndent of astrology for the last fifty years and l have always felt the need for a book which can help an earnest student of astrology in following a systematic approach to the understanding of this subject. Attempts have been made to make this volume a comprehensive and systematic compilation
10 that both a beginner and an advanced student may nol be bewildered by the apparent contradictions	between	certah1 6utras.
   In compiling this volume, I nave received immense help from my distinguished friends Shri Nirmal Chandra Moitra and Prof. Bimala Prasad Mukhopadhyaya and I would like to record here that I shall ever remain indebted to them.
Lastly it would be a great fault on my part if I do not offer an
apology to my learned readers for the undernoted lapses.
   Certain Sanskrit terms and names are spelled differently In different places, such as :-Vrbaspathi is spelled somewhere as Vrhaspati, Makar as also Makara etc.
In appendix some of the important matters which misaed m:,
attention have been explained elaborately.
14th Aprll 1981	HARIHAB MAIUKDD


Dedicated
to
SHRI N. C. MorrRA, M. A.
&
$HRI 8. P. MUKHERJEE, M. A.
but for whose enthusiastic efforts the book would
not have seen the light of the
day.
-Author

Introduction

Astrology is &s old as civilisation. But of course there can be
-no precise pin-pointed date for the outbreak of the phenomenon
-or rather the phase we call 'civilisation'. The leftist writer Lionel Britton in his 'Hunger and Love' described it aa 'Syphilisation•; but that is another story.
It might just as well be said that 'Astrology is as old a¦
supcntition.' Nor can there be any precise pin-pointed date for the outbreak of the phase we call 'superstition•. Historians may parade the Age of Reason, a, if this ended the Age of Faith or of superstition. But that is all Facile generalisation and tendentious. For, 'civilisation' and 'superstition' have always co-existed. In
.fact they may be described as indistinguishable phases of a single reality. The terminology has varied according to the point of view of the viewer.  The rationalism of to-day may be tho
·supent,tions' of tomorrow. The changes are so rapid and kaleido1cobic. We shed old superstition• to take on new ones­ also old rationalising for new ones, like new lamps for old.
Religion had its own categories of mummery, superstition,
-blind dogma, repeated rituals, litany and a special esotorically trained priesthood. And thus Religion has been the notor1ou1 whipping boy of History.
   Much the same deteriorations have been proceeding in Science. It entered the scene with a bang, doubtless broke down many old. conceptions and imparted marvellously new ideas of the universe, but, as it developed, has been going the same way that Religion had taken.
   II created its own esotoric quarrels, with a special language, apecial rituals, assumptions and dogmas and its own acolyies and priest1-Specially trained in its own esotoric methods and habits or thought. The time, we reckon, is not probably far olf when there would be a reaction to Science as we now know it, to be followed by a sort of reversal or  throw-back-just as there was
-ar had been a reaction to religion.  The  beginnings of this
Loaction are already here.

.,:

   It is more or less against this background that Astrology bu to be considered.	Astrology	has never been quite on the defensive ; for there is a case for it which is stronger than many people would imagine. And it offers, to use the language of a book-reviewer of the Newyork Times writing about the Chinese book of changes, "A release from a discredited Science and rationafom ......a relation	between individual and his worlds undreamed in the schemes of social ingenuous engineers.''
   Human society, as we find it now is only too obviously pervaded with a sense of unrest and insecurity. There might have been similar experiences with human society in the pan, but that is not our current concern. Probably society is facing an evolutionary crises for man kind ; we seek, but donot find any co-ordination between our ancient faith or religion and the modern scientific or pseudo-scientific environment	where we live, move and have our being. The resultant mat-adjustment is a major malaise and a good reason for a fresh look at Astrology and other old values.
   "In recent years", as a distinguished writer has observed, 'a great deal of attention has been given to the idea 'of an expanding conscienceness'-a conscious awareness that can reach out to perceive and understand an 'object' separate from th 'subject'. ThP.I is, the perceiving instrument, yourself. There are many ways to experience this expanding awareness. They range from drug taking and	flagellation to meditation and religious experience.
   Students of Aldous Huxley and Raymond Mortimer would recall the drugs which open the 'door of perception': flagellation would be remembered along with mysticism. 'Meditation' and experience' is a phrase probably too often to be profaned afresh. And that is exactly where Astrology comes on.
   The word 'moo ·struck' is a reminder that since time immemorial people have believed that the moon exercises in:llueoces on man. And this bdief was lound by close, repeated observuL1on and experii:nce. So. tf the moon influences man, why should not tb.e other planets ?  And Astrology grew as soc,n as such questions were posed. Research follows-a sequal to the laboratc,ry research of our umes, the only Q ifference berng that in ancient research the human system itself was the laboratory.

xi
   There ia a 1utra in Patanja/i Yoga that deep meditation and• concentration in a specific manner would produce in the yoga an intimate knowledge of the constitution ofsiars and constellations, And this is thus one example.
   Hindu astrology which is introduced in this book is just a section of the v.ast subject, hut nevertheless an important section. The ancient	Babylonian, Chaldean and	Greek	systems of astrology are as good as lost ; the Chinese and the Hindu systems remain and these are mutually complimentary, Modern research, in its own way, with the backing of modern science is doing its. best to supplement Hindu astrology,	There has never been any qnestion of supplanting it,	It is one of the abiding intellectual treasures of mankind.
   I am happy to be privileged to introduce this book. For, it is not one of the run-of-the mill books that drive good books out of market, but on the contrary as has been written by a man devoted to the subject who has spent the best part of his life studying it.
   I have known the author for nearly four decades now and can respectfully testify to his deep knowledge of astrology and allied subjects.
April 1981	N. C. MolTRA.

Preface
   All glories to Shri Shri Guru and Gauranga, Hari, Hari Bot. This new book by Shri Harihar Majumder, is a very important, contribution to the world of Vedanga Jyotisha. It is a great asset to the neophyte and master astrologer alike due to the lucid and masterly way in which the subject matter haa been bandied.
   The very basis of becoming a successful astrologer is the thorough unc'erstanding of the meanings of the different grabas, rasis, naksbatras and bhavas. Thus in this book you will not find mechanical lists of rasi or bhava-phala which are often misleading (They are also easily obtainable in many other books), rather the emphasis i• on the student becoming well­ acquainted with the basic building blocks of astrology with which he can make many grand constructions.
   It should be mentioned	at	this point that Shri Harihar Majumder, in the tradition of the Vaisnavas has tried to faithfully follow in the footsteps of the previous acharyas of astrology. For the most part he hs given the essence of Maharishi and when there has been some moot point be bas given the opinion of other eminent astrologers and of course his own vast experience­ of over 40 years in the field,  I have read dozens of books in the field of Vedic Astrology in the English medium, but to be quite honest none of them have come close to the extent of thorough­ ness in content and presentation that this book bas attained.
   Some of the salient	features that make this book indis­ pensable are : delineation of the meaning of the Nakshatras, Vedic methods of rectifying the lagna, the meaning and use of the	Arudha chakra, the importance	and	meaning of the Shayanadi bhava. There is a whole section dtaling in Arishta,. Ayurdaya and the unique technique of the Pataki cbakra. The author has •pared no pain• in carefully delineating all the bhavas and the result of the bhava lords in different bhavas. One of the greatest and most significant sections is the one describing the famous but little understood Shodasa vargas of Parasara, no one,. a1 yet has taken the trouble to deal with this pcrplex;ng topic.

xiv

"'nd its discussion should stimulate a lot of research into the subject of Shodasa vargas to help us expand our knowledge in this field. Vimshottari dasa is amply discussed with the exclusion of the usual mechanical tables for dasa and bhukti phala which are often unreliable. As was stated before the principal is to become thoroughly acquainted with the theory so that the student can handle all !he exceptions to the mechanical rules which are usually met with in day to day astro,ogy.
   It should be noted that while a chapter has been provided for the calculation of the so-called 'bhava-sphuta' or division of houses, this is meant rnlely for the information of the studenrs who desire to know it and is not used by eithor Shri Harihar Majumder or myself. When questioned as to the nature of bhavas and their extent, Shri Majumder answered that the bhava is equal in extent to tbe rasi, and that this was the practice of Parasara, Varahamihira and other ancient eminent astrologers. Thus the chapter on bhavasphuta is really superfluous, but has only been included because of its present day popularity.
   I pray to the Lotus Feet of Shri Shri Rad ha Krishna and Shri Shri Gaura-Nitai that  Shri Harihar  Majumder may be
.able to continue in his work and bring to the English speaking world the authoritative knowledge of the Vedanga Jyotisha,
April 1981	SHYAMASUNDABA DAS (ISKOON)

ContentsPagesI.Predictive Astrologyl2.Astrology and Forecasts12
CHAPTER-I
I. S,1ar System-Earth, Planets & Stars	22
2. Names of Bhavas	24
3. N ,kshatra (constellations)	25
4. Symbols of Planets	26
5. The  Pecking order among Rasis	26
6. List of benefic and malefic Planets	27
7. Planetary Relations	27
8. Allocation of Planetary Rulership	28
9. Exaltation and Mooltrikone signs of Planets	29
to. Aspects	30
CHAPTER-II

I I.Peculiarities of Rasia explained3212.Peculiarities of Nakshatraa3913.Signification of Planets5314.Nature and characteristics of Planetsdescribed by other eminent Astrologers62IS,Structure and temperament of Planets6416.Abodes of PJ,nets6517.Specification of inftuences of planets indifferent bhavas6518.A few important planets, their variousmoods and derivative inftuenccs66
CHAPTER-Ill
19. Wh•t is lagna 1	69
20. Method of calculation of lagna and lagnasphuta	69
21. How to find out grahasphuta	71
22,  Lagnasphuta	72

,:vi

23.Bhavaspbuta7324.How to teat correctness of lagna7725.Determination of Sex from Drekkana8026;What is Gulik and Pranpada lagna?8l27.Testing correctness of lagna from Gulik8428.Pranpada8429.Arudha Chakra8730.G neral rules to judge an Arudha Cbakra8931.Shayanadi Bhava9332.Planets in different Bhavas and results thereof97

0HUTER-IV

33.Rules for determining merit of moods or bhavas1103 .Summuy of the rules indicated abovellS35.When a planet is considered weak?11636.Delineation of Sada-Varga11637.When a planet is said to have acquired strengthin a Varga?119
0HAl'TER-V

38.Indication of Bhavas12039.The first bhava12040.Position of the lord of the !st
bhavas and results thereofhouse in different
12[41.Dhana bhava (the 2nd house)125(i)Eye-disease, (ii)  Dumbness12642.Indication of disease from the2nd house127(i) Ti1e yoga that makes a man a liar	127
(ii) The yoga that makes a man rich	127
(iii) Daridra yoga (Poverty)	130
43. Results of the lord of the 2nd house occupying
different bhavas	131
44. The Third h0use	133
45. Affinity with brothers and sisters	136
46. Positions of the lord of 3rd house in different
bbavas and results thereof	137
47. The Fourth house	139

















0HAPrBB-Vl
.50. The Fifth houoe
146(i)	Si&n• of sterility146(ii)  A woman who bears only one child147(iii) Yogas signifying birth to one child and yogaaco"cerning a woman giving birth of deadchildren143(Iv) Yoga of childleHness in a woman'• rasichakra.•.143(v)	Birth of children at a very late age149(vi)  Adopted son14!>(vii) Other important things about the 5th hou1cand ita lord1:,0(viii) Yogas that make man an author151(ix)  Yogas causing sharp intellect151(x)	Rrn,lts of the lord of the 5th house in differentbhavaa1.52Sl.	The Sixth house!54{i)	Special yogas concerning disease15&(ii)  Occupation of 6th lord in different bhavas andreaults thereof159
0HAPTEB-Vll52.  Jaya bhava161(i)  Number of wives161{ii) Two whes162(iii) One wife and one 10n161


(t,)



,:'hree wiveJ.

x,m



161

<•l
(•il
(,II)

More than two wives Gonduct of the wife
A good, honest, religious-minded and
faithful wife

162
163

164


(,ill) A religious-minded wife practising penance164(i:,:)  A bad, cruel, ill-behaved or haughty wile165(z)	Possibility of early marriage166(zi) The yoga that maktl a person bachelor orspimter (Anurba yoga)166(zii) Late marriage167(ziil) Illustration of late marriage
(zl•) lnspite of these yogas marriage is possible161under some circumstances168Important factors for determininc time of marriace169(i)	Definite period of marriage170(Ii)  Yogas of immorality, loose m rab or badcharacter171(i!i) Yogas that make a person moral-minded,chaste in sexual life173(l,)Good and honest wife or husband may beexpected from the following yogas174(,)01her unfavourable yogas regarding the 7thbl!ava-premature death of wife or husband175(,i)Widowhood175
The following configuration or planets nullify the
yogas of widowhood	176
(i)	Determination of wife's ( or husband's )
Family standard or Pedegree176(Ii)Love marriage, Civil marriage, Intercastemarriage etc.177(iii}Conjugal life177(iv)Occupation of planets in the 7th bbava and r,sul ts thereof
178(v)Occupation of the 7th lord in diffaent bbavas atld results thereof
180
xix
0:a.ll''l'IIB-'Till
S3,  The Eighth house	182
S4.  Bala-ristha	183
ss. Ganda	186


S6. Pataki chakra
S7.  Diva }amardha and Dandapathi
S8. Diva }limiirdha Table
59. Meth d of finding out Dandapathi

...
...

...	187
188
189
189

60. How to determine Pataki-ristha 1	190
61. What are protective factors 7	191
62. Pitri-ristba	191
63. Matli-ris, ha	192
64. Bala•ristha	194
65. Occupaoion of the 8th lord in different bhavaa Unhappy or painful cod of life














f7.	A few more yogaa ll'lated by Maharshi Parasara to ascertain longivity
18. A few formulas stated by Mahanhi Parasara by






...















213

whicb Zone of long hfe may be aacertained	213

19. A few formulas of Uttara Kalamrita about
lo111ivily

...	2l4

YX

CHAPTBII-IX
80. Bhagya Bhara.  The Ninth hou¦e	211
81. Configuration of planets that conatitute good
bhagya yogas	211
82. Configuration of planets and bhava-lords
indicating prosperous life in different ages	21•
83. Religious inclination etc.	.	220
84. Occupation of 9tlt lofd in different bhava	220
85. The Tenth or Karma bhan	221
86. Positions of some of indicators of Karma bhava
of the 10th lord	22'1
87. How to judge Karma bhava?	An illustration
and delineation of the chart	224
88. Further information, about 10th hou¦e, its
lord and Ravi	22,
(i) Death of parents	226
(ii) Earning of money, position, distinction in
social life and professional career	217
(iii) Means of livelihood or nature of profession	221
{iv) Another opinion supported by majority of
astrologers	230
{v)	Descriptious of planetary combination¦and
indications of vocation	231

(vi) Oscupation of 10th lord in different bhava,
89. EleYenth house
90. Occupation of the lord of 11th house in different

...

232
231

bhava	23)
91. Twelfth house	134
92. Occupation of the 12th lord in different bhava¦	23S

011.lP!BII-X

93. Beneficial planets accordin& to different lain•	l31

94. Benefic or malefic bhavaa and their lord, 9S, Sthira Karaka

...

237
23'

xxl

0IUP'll!B-XI
t6.  Vlmsottari Dasa and Antardt,a or Bhnkti or
Period and Snb-period24397.Calculation of dasa and Antardasa250,2519S.Vimaottari Dasa and Antardasa Table253119.Fundamental principles of judging dasa andtoo.antardasa in predicting ever.ta
A few important points to be noted carefully255
2S90HAPTRR-X!I
101. Aatott¦ry Das¦and Antardasa	262
101.	Method of calculation of Antardasa	262
103. A•tottary dasa Table	263
104. Method of calculation of balance of dasa at the ...
105. Astottary dasa-antardasa Table	266


01Ul'T11B -XIII
(09' Judgment of dasa and antardasa according to
Uttarakalamrita
107. Special rules for da1as of Rahu and Ketu
1e,. A few more instructions about judgment of daaa
-109.	Interesting results of the dasa and antardaaa of


...
...



268
270
271

Sukra and Sani	273
HO.  Dasa and antardua of Sani an J Ravi	274
111.  M,harshi Parasara's inatruction• about judgment
or dasa and antardasa	1274
l12.  Determination of favourable, unfavourable
antardasas	""	275
tl3.  Results of dasa and aotarda1as of planets of
different stages	276
114.	Re1ult1 of Mahadasa and Antardua (accordinc
to Sanartha Chintamoni)	277
0HaPTBB-XIV
us. B¦J¦7og¦1	283
u,. When Rajayoga ii considered defunct t	284
117. Maharaj¦ yoga	"'	286

x:dl
118. When these yo1as will be fruitful 1	m
119. When a native ha¦aenae of decency or
aestheticism ?	_293
(I}  Adhi yaga	294
(II) Sunapha yoga, Anapha yoga, Durudhara or
Uvachary  yoga	29.,
(iii) Chatursagara yoga	297
(iv) Ekabali yoga	298
{v)  Yogas according to Jataka-Parijat	l98
(vi) Rucbaka yoga, Bhadra yoga, Hamsa yoga,
Malavya yoga	299

(vii) Sasa yoga, Bhaskar yoga, Indra yoga, Marut yoga, Budha yoga

...

30!)







Jataka-Parljat	3
(.,/v) When a native becomes a millionaire?






(.,i.,) Ownership of houses	313
Prabrajya or Sannyas yoga (religious

(.,.,,,

mendicancy)	314
When Sannyas yogas arc defunct?	317

(.,.,11) Yogas of glorious and virtuous d¢eds	317
(.,.,iii) Taking bath in holy river or sea	318

(.a.,iv) Yogas that make a man an orator or
lucnt 1peakcr

...

319•

xxlil
CHAPrB:a-XV

120.Asthanr&• System320121.Ravi and other planets' asthavarga321122.Mahasthavarga32S123.A>thavarga chakra-an illustration32S!24.
125.To determine dhana yoga (from Mahastha varga)•··
Gocbarpbala or results of transits of planets in328different houses329126. A few general rules of application of gocharphala of planets	339
127. Table of Vedastha na of each planet	342

128. Diseases
(i) Biindoeas

CHAP:J:BR--XVI

...	...

343
343

(ii) Loss of one eye, night blindne11	345
(,)	Dcafoess or disease of eara

(""'•}Disease of fever36 ·,..,vi)Di1ease of cancer369(.,zvli)Disease of leukaemia (blood cancer)371(:,:zviii)Yogas indicating bad health371(.,.,i.,)Painful or unnatural death373(:,:z.,)Suicide and unnatural or accidental death3U

CI!APTEB-XVII
129, When Rajayogas are Ineffective ?
(I)	The yoga that make• a man a beggar	,••
(ii) A few more yogas of beggary
(iii) E tinction of Family lineage
(jv)		When a native is considered a dis1race to the family?
(,)	Rekba yoga
(vi) The yogas that indicate poverty
(vii) Yogas quoted from Hora Ratna	...
(viii) Yogas of poverty quoted from Laghu Parasari ... (Ix) Yogas of poverty quoted from Sarvartha
Chlntamony
(e}		Yogas of poverty quoted from Bhavartha Ratnakar
(zi) A few Daridra and other unfavourable yogas
130. Delineation of some Vargas as dealt with by Maharshi Parasara and some other authors.
{a) Sada-Varga; (b) Dasa-Varga; (c) Sorasha-Varga
(I) What these different Vargas indicate?
(ii) How to determine a favourable Varga of a planet?
{iii] How Varga-Chakras are analysed?
(Iv) Indication of results for lords of some other bhavas
131,	About 9th lord
132. TABLES :
133. APPE"IDIX-A. Method of Calculation
134. APPENDIX-B.  Dreams-A Mystery


37S
378
378
380·

381
382
383
384
38S

38G

388
389'

391
392

393
395

396
397
1,-_,,

HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
( PREDICTIVE ASTROLOGY)

   Astrology, older than the Christian Era, flourished greatly in ancient Egypt, Greece, Babylon and India. To what extent at tilat time ancient Indian culture influenced tilem is not exactly determinable.		And reasons for this are that during the twilight tilat descended		 upon	India as a result of the	consecutive invasions of the Huns, Sakas and Muslims to mention only the conspicuous ones of the series, the ancient civilization of India was not on!y smothered but	nearly	obliterated		er	driven underground, to produce in	 a much later period, not	a syntheses, but a queer amalgam. Tilis is a matter on whicil there silould be no controversy. It is not possible in consequence to trace the origins and tile development of such disciplines as Philosophy,		Physical	Sciences, Matilematics,		 Astronomy and Literature in tileir correct historical perspectives, nor to assess tile influences whicil an enormous land-mass like India must ilave	exercised		over il r	neigilbours in the various spheres of culture botil in tile Middle East, as also in the East.
   If tile evolution of Astronomy as also Astrology has to be consecutively retraced step by step and their right places have to be assigned in the scileme of knowledge, ii' we have to disentangle it all from the general ilistory, chiefly tile history of Egypt, Greece and Babylon then, as is well known as these civilizations naturally lead down to European civilizations, it is like arguing in a circle, for if one starts enquiry about European civilizations, one has to go up the stream, as far as different cultural histories are involved, to Egypt, Greece and Babylon.	It is a compulsive, tilere being no other way; and an appraisal-or rigilt estimate of tile importance of Astronomy and Astrology in the history of these ancient civilizations, is possible only if ilistorical, pre-historical and archaeological enquiry is intensive enough.
Unfortunately, there is controversy as to whether predictive
astrology is scie11tific enough to be called a Science. Needless to add, most of the Scientists are not prepared to accept it as Science

2	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE

 because of conservatism and	the		old grooves of thought, and		the old landmarks	die-hard. But	Astronomy is an accepted Science and, for the advancement of it there has been no lack of money to spend and what has been or is being spent already is just an earnest of more to be spent in future. Those who pursue Astronomy call Astrology a superstition and use abusive epithets		 to garnish their prejudices.	The scientific spirit, which includes or rather should include, curiosity and toleration	 as		basic factors, is thus entirely lost	proving incidentally that Science can be almost as despotically dogmatic as the Church which condemned Galileo. Modern Science has evolved its own hierarchy and rituals and· mumbo-jumbo which are as unintelligible beyond a certain charmed circle, as the liturgy and litanies of the Church are. Science has its own priest-craft, and its acolytes. It is they who compete with one another		in		describing Astrology as a pseudo-Science, without of		course the obligation of learning anything of it.	Late Pandit Jaha warlal Neheru who stood at the apex of the political		 pyramid	was the	most fashionable know-all the Indian scene and other politicians who aped him did not deprive Astrology of its ration of abuse.  It is known to all or should	be, that, while astrologers only try humbly to interpret Man's		fate, the politicians sneer at the astrologer as long as they are successful then, when things take an adverse turn, rush to ashramas and quack astrologers to be sneered at. Notwithstanding all this, as long as civilizations endure, both politics and astrology shall co-exist, both undecapitatcd-not only with their beads on, but possibly with their heads high.
The Question often bandid about is "why should the planets
take any interest in human affairs ?"
   Let the point be examined a little. We all know and would be prepared to admit that creative evolution is not a haphazard process. The evidence of design is omnipresent right from the atomic and sub-atomic stages upto the highest, in close integration. The chain of causation and sequence is intensively real but so usual and so much taken for granted that it is hardly perceptible, involving as it does a pattern of fusion of animate and inanimate creations. The animal world, the vegetable world and even the solar system fall into

HINDU SOIENOE OF :l'llE FU:l'URE	3

their as,igned niches but with a sort of symbiosis running all through.  At least  it  merits some  thinking.  We shall have
-0ccasion to discuss the relations of the animal world to the planets; but for the present one or two illustrations may suffice. With too many cloudy days and the Sun's rays at discount a sort
-0f fungus-like insects grows in crops which destroys the green shoots and causes famine. Food cooked during the solar or lunar eclipses gets stale ; it has been observed that toxic bacilii grow in it and cause disease.
From  many observed cases of this nature it would be quite a
<:orrect inference to make that the planets of the solar system do influence both animate and inanimate creation on Earth. The results of the Sun are self-evident, we only wish, the results of other Planets were equally so. If they were, the questions about the  good  and  the  evil  of  humans through food or
.otherwise would be almost self-explanatory, It is the result of  vast and  subtle  observation encompassing  considerable
-experience that planets and their position• do affect the Earth generally and the lives of the inhabitants of the Earth in particular, to a great extent in detail. It is not only not irrational, but quite rational if the  superstitions  of pseudo­
.Science are not preferred. According to all canons of common sense  and  reasoning this  should  be so.  The planets are in
-ceaseless motion. This would mean that everything related to these is also constantly in a state of flux.
   One acts and reacts perpetually and each delicate shed of action and reaction amounts to an influence. From star to star vibrates light, also from soul to soul.
   Astrology tries to find out and delineate the generally unknown and imperceptible reasons for these influences. Whether the general principles that have been evolved are
<:orrectly applied in any particular case is a matter of knowledge, experience and skill. So,  while the  Astrologer may be praised or blamed, according to his experience or cap1cities the principle of Astrology can hardly be dismissed off-hand. They go much too deep, almost strike at the root of things.
It is in this context that the Astrologer  uses  the	word
'destiny'-the term fashionable people in  prosperity so much

4	HINDU SOIENOE OF THR FUTURE

laugh at.		Whether however, the first laugh is also the last is another matter but the philosophers and wise men all the world over and through the ages have accepted the hypothesis of 'destiny'.	It	is	human	'character'	in 1reverse-'character' producing		 action, which again produces 'destiny'.	As the Episcopal Church admits, 'Predestination to life is the everlasting purpose of God.' The Bible clearly indicates the future of man which is the same as bis destiny. The history of the Jews is set forth in the Bible from the Genesis to the Revelation. Was not the life of Jesus and account of his Ministry written in the Holy Writ long before he was born ? Was not the Ramayana written before Ramchandra also ?	If the Holy Writ is believed the anticipations of Jesus Christ in it are to be believed also, and if that is so, there is no reason either to convict the Ramayana as post facto wisdom,
Let us take an instance of the most recent  times.  Cheiro
i.e. Count Louis Hammon predicted most accurately the time of Late Kitchner's death along with the attendant circumstances, long before this important event occurred.  And how could he do it? There have been other famous or notorious predictions equally uncanny in their accuracy. And how is it explained?
   In any case, Astrology is one of the oldest mental and intellectual disciplines of the world and it is necessary to enquire about its development, proficiency and extent of it. Cbeiro writes in the preface of his 'You and Your Hand', "People who in their ignorance disdain the wisdom of ancient races forget that the past of India contained secrets of life and  philosophy  that  following  civilizations  could not controvert, but were forced  to accept. For instance,. it bas  been  demonstrated that  ancient  Hindus understood the precession of  Equinox and  made calculations that it took place once in every 25,870 year•. The observations and mathematical  precession  necessary  to establish such  a theory has been the wonder and admiration of modern astronomers.  They  with  their  modern  knowledge  and up-to-date instruments are still quarrelling  among themselves as  to whether· the  precession,  the  most important feature in  astronomy, takes place every 25,870 years or every 24,500 years.  The majority believe that the Hindus made no

HINDC SCIENOE OF THE FUTURE	5

mistake, but how they arrived at such a calculation is as great a mystery as origin of life itself." In tbis preface Cheiro has rated Indian Astronomy highly-the calculations about the precession of Equinox which have been established only in our own times with precision had been done by the ancients almost as accurately and without the help of the mathematical gadgets we boast of. The Hindu sages achieved these triumphs long ago and without any margin of error.
   The history of all civilized nations will bear out on enquiry that Astronomy and Astrology have been studied everywhere quite intensively and all nations were and have been more or less proficient in these branches of Science. Chinese civilization is older than the Indian; priceless ancient manuscripts on Astronomy and Astrology are preserved in their temples to this day. Though there are numerous accounts of Astronomy and Astrology in Babylonian and Chaldean lore, treatises from these epochs have not come down to posterity. Egyptian Astronomer-cum-Astrologer Petosiris has been many times mentioned in ancient Egyptian mannscripts. It appears that he was a holy man, a priest or a pedlar of religion. He appeared to have written books on these subjects as early as the 8th century B. C. during the Emperor Niceps. Unfortunately none of his writings have survived, Clodius Ptolemy mentioned
Petosiris many  times in  his works. Western Astronomy and Astrology have followed the lead of Ptolemy. Many startling tllings are said of Al-Hakim of Persia and detail about him can be obtained in the national. library of Iran. It is said that he predicted  birth of Jesus. Judicia or Jimipsia is a name that  frequently  occurs in the  writings of the famous historians of these days. They say, the methods of calculations of Arabian astrologers were rather strange but nevertheless most significant, but there is hardly any library which has preserved the Arabic works, Collections of nomadic Gypsies might contain traces of them, though no systematic volume can be obtained. The methods of calculations of the Gypsies have been followed in Europe with results astonishingly accurate. No wonder if it is someday revealed that Yavanacharya, Tajik, and Yavan Rishis of our country were the descendants of Arab Gypsies or vice versa. Anyway, fragments

6	HINDU BGIENOE OF THE FUTURE

from Arabian Astrology and Astronomy used from time to time have yielded results breathlessly astonishing.
   Whatever might have been the fate of astronomical and astrological works in the history of ancient Egypt, Chaldea, Arabia and ether ancient countries,  the fact remains that in the treatises of China and India priceless treasures of wisdom exist and are easily available. No systematic history of Indian astronomy and astrology has as yet been attempted ; but when it is, it will prove incontestably that before the Western countries were lit up by civilizations, many thousand years before that time India had made phenomenal progress in Science, Philosophy and literature, and astronomy and astrology were a part of holy disciplines of the Veda,.
E. M. Plunkett in 'Ancient calender and constellations' writes "The opinion of Greek writers at the beginning of Christian Era may be quoted as showing the high estimation in which Indian astrology was held." It appears that the Greek Scholars used to hold Indian astronomy and astrology in the highest esteem and also along wah these, the practitioners of this Science. Needless perhaps, but nevertheless necessary to mention that in the ancient world astronomy and astrology were not as differentiated as they are now, but were integrated, one merging into and inseparable from the other like Chemistry and Alchemy. In the life of Apollonius of Tyana who was a great scholar among distinguished scholars of his time we learn that he had opportunity of learning astronomy at the feet of Indian astronomers.
   After all this it is hardly necessary to emphasise the Indian astronomers' depth of astronomical and astrological learning. And all of them worked on the basic onception that the planets do influence human life in various ways and in detail. They collected their data accordingly and also collated, classified and co-ordinated them accordingly. It was the result of ardorous training con verging upon a single objective and spread over countless years.
   Western Scientists have also researched in  astronomy for a long time and •accepted Astronomy as a Science. But it is curious that in regard to Astrology they do not employ the same rationality as in astronomy and as a result failed to accept it as.

HINDU OIENCE OF THF FUTURE	7

a branch of the same science. Let us take the definition of Science as set forth in Funk and Wagnalls' Standard Dictionary
-''A knowledge  of facts, laws and proximate causes gained
and verified by exact observation and correct thinking-also, sum of universal knowledge-an exact systematic  statement or classification of knowledge concerning some subject in which the results of investigation have been systematised:'
   There can be no two opinions				about the wisdom of the definition	quoted				above.				And if			that is		 so.	predictive astrology would obviously  rank very high as a Science. For, it is not the result of  only a year's enquiry but  has stood the test of ·thousand of years on the  basis of amassed data researched and processed over the same long time. Scientists wonder how	the	ancients could		 secure all		 this		 accurate knowledge about the planets without the help  of laboratory instruments. The		result				which			the ancient Indian sages obtained through their mathematical					calculations in which their proficiency was in their own times unsurpassable, was put to the test in all succeeding ages and have hardly ever been found wanting ; and it was on this that their formulae were involved-the Formulae which are the guide-lines of the Hindu Astrology. They			have come			down to us and	are being tested in our own times and found to be true and they appear to bear  all the scrutiny quite well.  We have to go back thousands of years for the age when these Indian sages worked. Most of the			European peoples had not been born and knew nothing about them ; they  were just  non-descript primitive people in forests which covered whole the land area. In India at the same time the Aryan Rishies			were setting themselves			hard			for		rigorous		tests for	their		scientific enquiries.		Observations			and	experiments		went			together and results were passed through the sieve of a system which triumphed in summary  intellectual  conclusions.  Predictive astrology of to day as we kno·,v it now carries their ancient conclusions to this day.  As said before they took astronomy and astrology in the same stride and those who looked after the cure of disease, the healers and physicians, had to be versed in not only the run-of-the-mill writings in  medical lore,  but also  m  Tantras, Yoga and Vedas. They were all integrated,

8	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
so as to form a corporate core. It was not possible for one in those days to be a competent physician or a Tantrik without adequate knowledge of predictive astrology-the right propitious time for use of medicines and administration of therapeutic  remedies. One might recall with  profit that great cultural epoch which we call the Renaissance. The calendar was used to be consulted always for the right time for administration of medicines.
   It has been said that the Vedas represent the ultimate knowledge, The key to the Vedas has been lost, but fitful glimpses may be had of the immense range and  profound depth of the learning that was embalmed in the Vedas, Astronomy and Astrology have  been described  as the eve
-that is to say, the instrument of vision of the Vedas. An American  scholar says, "Astrology is indeed a synthesis of all branches of knowledge. It includes, into various ramifica­ tions. such modern Sciences as Astronomy, Medicine, Biology, Chemistry, Physics and many others."
   In fact predictive astrology is the co-ordination of various Sciences-Astronomy, Medical sciences, Biology, Chemistry, Physics etc. The astrologer has also to be ass•imed to be a psychologist and this is a 'must' for  him, The real place for Astrology ist hat of a sort of enclave in Metaphysics and Philosophy. But is not all Science, in a deeper and more permanent sense, a similar enclave in Metaphysics  and  Philosophy?  Has  not the  work  as Einst,en, Edington and other sages gor.e beyond the sphere of matter and touched. if not  delved into the greater world of spirit '/
   The Scientists of our own times are so apt to forget that the ancient sages of India were not holy and  religious people only. They were aiso Scientists with result-oriented research through  observation  and  experiment as their special 'metier'. Take for  i,1stance  Yoga, which is older than Patanjali, who only wrote down for posterity something of  the  unrecorded  knowledge  of  his  predecessors.  Most of the Yogic  postures are  taken  and reproduced from animal life, which bad been observed with luminous intelligence and  close  minute realism.  The  men who did

HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE	9
the observations were not religious men only, they were also great secular investigators, that is, Scientists. Predictive astrology and astronomy, to the Hindu Sages were just indistinguisb.able aspects of the same great variety and reality. The moderns have broken up the integration, fragmented them and pride themselves on their top-sided results which  they call speculations. Astronomy ceases to be down-to-the earth useful to everybody, if divorced from its astrological counterpart.  It may remain useful to the mariner, but in the case of others it becomes too limited and circumscribed. The interest evoked  becomes academic and hardly anything more; whether Mars is bigger than Pluto or Pluto is bigger than Mars is by no means an ordinary man's cup of tea. Nine-tenths of the popular utility of the science is thus lost.
  Scientists now-a-days preen themselves on their close and vast knowledge of Solar system. And rightly enough, there is much to boast of. But it is equally obvious that all the knowledge accumulated so far is only a very small fragment of the enormous knowledge that still lies beyond. Our modern Scientists can very well explain such phenomena as cyclones and tidal bores and there are many interesting stories current in England about this. But did the Hindu Varaha Mihir of the ancient times lag much behind?  The Hindu  Almanac ( Panjika as it is called ) indicates with quite substantial certitude the incidents of such phenomena as flood, earthquake, cyclone, draught and with absolute accuracy, the time of Solar and lunar Eclipses. The earthquake in Assam, largescale floods in various parts of India and many other happenings of similar nature were predicted quite correctly, which hardly left much room for modern science to improve upon. If that is so-and it is-there is no well-reasoned justification for expenditure of so much money, time and endeavour on Astronomy only, to the exclusion of its sister-,cience Astrology. What Benian observes in this connection 1s worth quoting. "........ the most of the so-called exact knowledge now in our possession, which concerns the actual movements of the Stars, and other heavenly bodies is a legacy handed down to us by the ancient Star-Scientists, astrologers."

10	HINDU SCIBNCB OF THB FUTURE
   The Hindu Rishis divided Astronomy into two parts. The first part Astronomy proper, dealt with only the positions of the planets, their correlations with space and their motions The second part Astrology dealt wi•h the various effects, the varying positions of the planets have on humanity, or rather on the whole animate creation of the earth. They dealt extensively in the second, i.e. Astrological part with the natural scientific changes and how they bring ab0ut earthquakes, famines, accidents etc., another section dealt with births and deaths, the evolution of individual and collective human life, sentime11ts, affections, cruelty, lovei desire and hate, in fact everything that makes up human life.
   It is probably	superfluous	to	add	that	the		ancient astrologers' quest for the Absolute in natural laws, particularly in respect of the solar system, led them, as from one	thing to another, to the minutiae in astrology.		It is a pity that, while in our own times, advanced mechanical means have been evolved to help researches in Astronomy, and nothing like all that, nothing even	approaching	it,		has			been done so far in Astrology. The reason is that quite a lot of superstition exist among scientific people about Astrology. It is open to argument whether	scientists who claim immunity from superstition are not themselves superstitious in certain things. Probably they shed old superstitions to take new ones. A few illustrations. might not be out of place.
   (i) There is a close nexus between the sea and the waxing and waning moon, the flow-tide and the ebb-tide prove it.
(ii) There  is	also	a  similar	nexus	between	female
menstruation and the waxing and waning moon, and also
   (iii) between the moon and the mind of man. Cases of lunacy, that is to say, cases where the human mind is derranged permanently or temporarily bring this into clear belief. These should prove, if it were not self-evident that the planets do have something to say in the fate of mortals.
   It is a matter of common observations that diseases like Asthma	and gout respond	variously	to	the	waxing and waning moon. · Cases of child-birth are also effected. It is also common experience that, while the individual destinies are matters of engrossing, even obsessing, interest to individuals

HINDU SCIENCE OF TI{E FUTURE	11
and they want to know as much they can about themselves and their future, they would readily be prepared to admit that, only with a mathematical yard-stick, the unknown cannot be fathomed. What can the conch-shell thrown up by the ocean know of the vast ocean itself? True indeed that human beings have, what is called reason and, not to lose grounding in t,:rra firma, a man has got to depend on it. But only as far as it goes. Reason is given to man for certain particular mental adjustmenu. One cannot, should not, even e<pect to do everything with it.  Just  like  spectacles, they are just a device to help the failing eye, this far and no further. If one would try to do everything with spectacles, for example, eat, it would be as absurd as a man trying to encompass everything with reason. Take for instance the enjoyment of a picture, the feeling of love, a father's love for bis children, the children's love for the father, the male's love for the female and vice versa, the appreciation of beauty ; these are not matters where reason is of much avail. It is emoti<>n that helps and that is implanted in man just as reason is, but on an entirely different plane. Intuition is such another. It opens the doors of perception, probably much sooner than reason or even emotion can; but only a few are. blessed with it.
   Our Hindu Rishis developed and disciplined their reason, but did not neglect either emotion or intuition. They put equal emphasis on all of them.
"'l,_fu ll_'flc 1; '!!>ii; 'lr-1"1 f-t I
"IW W 'lf 1-r_1•1fflf ; "11i!t'ftf.!il1 u•
   Meaning a rational statement is acceptable even though it might come from the lips of a child; anything irrational should be rejected like straw even though Brahma might have said it.
   Could the apotheosis of reason the more clearly put ? The Hindu Yoga Shastra is full of instances of apotheosis of intuition, as also as the methods to develop and discipline it.
   Ray Moulton wrote, "a scientist and astronomer of the highest rank advances the theory that there is an order in the universe, which embraces not only the regularity of the motion of celestial bodies, comprising the universe, but also includes

12	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
the  rhythm  of the physical, mental and emotional activities of human beings."

Astrology and Forecasts
   A question is freq'1ently asked why astrological forecasts would come out true or if there is any well-proved reason for such predictions to materialise. As a matter of fact, in the modern scientific age a person would like to understand everything as a plain mathematical sum and place himself on solid logical foundation. Anything else would not satisfy him. Any forecast about his future, even if found correct in the long run, would inevitably raise such  questions,-how did it come to pass? What is the relation between the stars and planets and our lives? He may be told that astronomers calculate the exact timings of high and low tide in rivers, can fortell solar and lunar eclipses or storms and cyclones. So there is nothing to wonder at if in personal life positions and combinations of stars and planets bring about a same kmd of effect as in the world of nature. But the person who questions would not accept it as a valid explanation. Because astrology is not the same thing as astronomy. An astronomer deals exclusively with the material world but a human beina is not just a particle of matter. He has undoubtedly certain intimate connection, some indissoluble ties with the world of matter. But it cannot be refuted that man is something more than different from matter. Hence how can calculations of a man's past and future based on planetary positions be true when there is so much of qualitative difference and dissimilarity of character between man and nature. He may well ask, even if such calculations prove to be correct, what is the logical ground for assuming that the correctness of those calculations is related to positions and combinations of certain stars and planets '!
   It is true that our ancient Shastras ( texts ) donot contain detailed statements, references to which can satisfy the modern scientific mind or be accepted as sufficient evidence. In Science and religion or prescription of social norms our sages of old have recorded their deep impressions while on occasions they have laid down certain important injunctions

HINDU SClBNOE OF '.rHE PU'.rURE	13

and on the whole left behind their conclusions and findings derived from immense experience. It is hard to believe that they reached a number of conclusions without any deep thinking or critical analysis and shifting of data. We have no sufficient documentary evidence gathered from old texts and records which can answer questioning minds satisfactorily. Probably, the writers of ancient texts did not think it necessary to leave such evidence on records or possibly the records were there at one time but have been lost to us for ever. We have therefore to go on with persistent researches into the texts, trying to find out clues so that treasures lost in the way may be retrieved. Many well-known scholars of different countries such as Maxwd, Clayton, Tice, Pikardi and others have made intensive researches in this direction. Dr. B. V. Raman, the well-known astrologer, is a tireless worker in this field and his scholarship is beyond dispute.
   In astrology there are even now some fundamental problems or questions which claim our careful attention, e. g.,
   (i) how do we arrive at astrologicai predictions ? Are these derived through any particular law of average from mathematical and statistical princles or do they issue from something basic or fundamental which is not just mathematics or derived from statistics ?
   (ii) What is the real character of the planets? Do their material existence and their relative remoteness or proximity affect the animate and the inanimate world within the solar system?
  (iii) Is there any such well-ordered regulating principle, more or less mechanical, in the conduct and action of the planets which would invariably influence every living creature?
   (iv) What is the real contribution of astrology to the unfolding of life's hidden secrets and its mysteries?
   Here I shall enter into some discussion and try to explain that in order to follow the true nature of astrological prediction one has to understand in what ways and to what extent certain unseen forces influence or regulate the tenor of life. Now a fow words are necessary at the beginning. Firstly researchers in science know well that the data must be wholly dependable,

H	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
that their truth or falsity or other attributes must be beyond doubt or dispute. To rely on heresay and to use unverified evidence definitely goes against proper scientific enquiry.
   Secondly, any preconceived notion or personal bia's in regard to an individual is sure to hamper astrological  calculations and finding (at arriving astrological decision) about him. The astrologer must proceed to work like a true res,,archer. For example, my limited knowledge through personal contact leads me to believe that Mr. X is an honest man. But if on  the basis of this conviction I say that Mr.Xis thoroughly honest and that he can not be dishonest then I assume or anticipate something which naturally would vitiate my prediction.
   Thirdly, and this is the most important fact as stated by the great poet Kalidas who incidentally has left some authoritarian astrological works that "astrology can only indicate a possible future, God only determines it. In other words, astrology can speak of the possible ups and downs or the good and bad incidents in the hfe of an individual and can also give a sketch or some pattern of durations of those good and evil times." Now, if we claim or expect from an astrologer something more than. this, then he bas to bring into play his vast experience and knowledge and use his own sense of discretion, This can be done in some cases by knowledgeable men with wisdom born of experience. ii is neither fair nor reasonable to ascribe to any shastra or branch of knowledge the credit for infalliability or discredit for inaccuracy.
   It would be well to remember all this. But one must not be led to suppose that astrology as a Science is inadequate or worthless. As a matter of fact, astrology is neither incomplete nor useless. It must be admitted, however, that there are limitations and impediments in the process of calculations. Experience shows that findings or careful calcnlations have been falsified because of errors regarding the time and place of birth and such other basic data or because of the astrologer's preconceived notion about the native. It is needless to say that all this does not signify the futility or inadequacy of the Shastra.
It would be very true to say that a well-versed astrologer free
from bias and preconception can with the help of his insight and

HINDU SClllNCB OF THE FUTURE	15
 tested experience draw an accurate picture of an individual's career if there is no error involved in the primary data such as birth time and place, combinations and position of planets at the particular moment of bis birth. But:such accurate information
-Or correct data may not be at the di,posal of the ast1ologer with total knowledge and the scientific mind if he cannot acquire it by his own effort.
   Hence my thesis is that astrology is neither untrue nor illusory nor even something queer. The astrologer's knowledge may be limited, his calculations may even be wrong but for that, the shastra itself can not be discredited.
   To-day in the world of Scientists there bas begun an intensive xesearch in astrology with a new zeal.
   The celebrated Russian Scientist Prokofaire has entered a new sphere of astrological research and termed it Haliobiology. German researchers have called the same branch of knowledge CosmobiJlogy. Such terminological differences are immaterial. The important point to note is while one section of present day scientists try to laugh away the entire shastra, another section of
distinguished Scientists are simultaneously making eager efforts to know closer and better the role of astral influence on the
.course of individual life and its material conditions. Perhaps, they have not been able, at the moment to find out the nexus or the kind of relationship existing between the stars and planets in remote space above and infinitesimal human lives below. Or it may be that they have not been able to know precisely at yet the causal relationship or the intimate connection between these two remote worlds in their actual workings. But at the same time it is hardly likely that a group of renowned scientists follow a mirage without getting a glimpse of some chance of
•uccess in the pursuit of their object of enquiry.
   It is not impossible for an average person with common sense to see even in some co'!lmon place instances the direct manifestation of the influence of astral bodies on the animate world. It is a well-known fact that the full moon and the newmoon have closer connection with the neap tide and ebb-tide i:i rivers
.and oceans. Similarly, it is a matter of common experieuce that the ailments  of  a  rheumatic  or asthmatic patient are usually
•ggravated on the Ekadasi (11th day of the bright or dark moon)

16	HINDU SOIENOE OF THE FUTUBB
and the new & full moon days. Physicians all over the world as well as laymen have noticed the changes of development of labour pain on those days. Ordinary persons without the gift of scientific inte.rpretation must have pondered why of all times on the new or full moon days rheumatics and asthmatics suffer more acutely. Such facts or matters of actual experience cannot be refuted e,en though they cannot explain how these coincidences occur.  Hence one is naturally led to think that a close connection with the stars and planets does exist on the physiological plane.
   There are certain points which need serious thinking. The primary, and perhaps the most important question in future researches in astrology is why our ancient sages, for the matter of fact, wise men of other climes had selected specifically a few of the millions of astral bodies and founded their basic science on the workings of these alone? Why again did they accord superiority to these selected heavenly bodies and brush aside the rest as of lesser importance or consider them outside the scope of their investigation ? On a satisfying answer to these questions depends the explanation of the fundamentals of applied astrology.
   I donot know if modern Western Scientists have been able to offer any solution of the points raised. But to make research fruitful some solution is imperative.  What is more, if some day a reasonable, well-considered answer to the pertinent questions is found, astrology as a branch of knowledge will have extended its horizon, and the scope and range of its operation would be limitless.  But this is not what I intend to discuss at present. I am simply mentioning it because I want to indicate the difficulties in the present state of limited knowledge and to hint at the tremendous possibilities in some future time. What I think to be most significant in this connection is that astrology as a living sphere of human knowledge is not static. Like other branches of Science it is making progress sure and steady though not swift.
  Our point of deliberation is-why should we accept astrological prediction as infallible by proceeding along the lines laid down? The astrological method or procedure as it has come down to us and the way it has been determined forms a separate

HINDU SCIENCE OP THE FUTURE	17
theme though this also is a prime question. But why do we assume that astrological predictions based. on the principles and formulae laid down in the shastra are not liable to error and totally dependable? This is what we propose to examine.
   A fact or a statement is taken to be true only when it docs not contradict, at least tallies fundamentally with proved facts or statements.
   Water runs from a higher level to a lower one-this is a well-established fact. Now if we posit any statement about water that is found wholly incompatible with its traditional, well­ established property, it would be unacceptable as a scientific proposition. The Upanisadas say that to understand the secret of creation and its reality, I.e. to acquire Para Vidva' ( ultimate knowledge) one has to resort first to Apara Vidya ( finite learning).  In other words, the acquisition of finite learning ( Apara Vidya) is the medium through which one has to proceed with utmost care and application towards the goal of Supreme or ultimate truth. Astrology is one of the branches of that finite Ieanning to which a special value has been given because it helps in unravelling the mysteries of the Universe and primal secrets of nature.
   Thus, the utility of astrology does not consist in merely getting an idea of the possible course of material life or some indications of future incidents of individual lives,  As a matter of fact, enquiries based on the principles of astrology help considerably in lifting the veil of mystery that surrounds the secrets of individual life a, well as covers the deeper meaning and purport of universal life.
  It has been admitted by almost all the ancient shastras that it is not possible to understand the nature of destiny or the purpose of life by ignoring or being indifferent to the basic truths on which our existence depends. For, that would only impede the progress of life or even lead it astray.
   Astrology as a shastra illumines that great and true path by following which we can reach the eternal goal, know the eternal principles which regulate our individual existences and share and acquire ultimate knowledge. Now by whatever term this universal existence may be described, Divinity or Destiny or by any other name, its predominance as a governing factor, its
2

18	HINDU SClEt\CE OF THE FU1URB
capacity to convey the supreme meaning of life is acknowledged equally by all the shastras. Its preponderating inlluence is indivisible, unequalled. If the different heavenly bodies are accepted self-sufficient and supreme in their individual spheres
i.e. if a similar kind of supremacy is attached to them and
admitted, then what has been characterised as ultimate reality loses its importance as the greatest cohesive force. Then one has to admit the supremacy of many in the non-material sphere.
   As a matter of fact, if the goal or objective becomes diversified the way to the goal loses its precise, distinct character. Hence what needs acceptance in astrology is the working of an undeviating intellect free from doubt and hesitancy, one firm undivided end and the presence of an all-pervading 'Supreme Mind or Intelligence'.
   This is the kind of Monism spoken of by Sri Chaitanya to Sri Sanatana. He said, "Brahman is the prime cause of the Universe. From Him it originates, in Him does it exist and finally end. Matter or Physical Nature is not the cause of the Universe, its source is God, the Creator."
Secondly, in the human world the working of a Divine will
or according to some, the presence of supra mundane force rising above environments has been posited. It has been said that the birth of life is not just a matter of sexual reproduction but something more. Besides the physical union of the male and female, there is a third force, often described as divine force which is beyond the world of senses. This is now accepted more or Jess unanimously.	Hence in life-Science the principle of selection governing the Union of sperm and ova bas been admitted. It is said that the fnsion of the male sperm with the female egg does not always click or fructify unfailingly. ID a successful union or semination some voluntary or self-guided selective process is at work. Hence every individual is born with his or her life-pattern or destiny. And the main reason for this is that each one has a distinct and specific end and that all these varying life-patterns are sustained by an omnipotent, all-pervading Will-purpose.
So, where do we go to see!-: the origin of these divergent
patterns of life, that is, the main source of such variables?
It is in the combination of stars and planets under which a

HINDU SCIBl<CE OF nm FUTURE	19
person is born that we have to seek an answer to the differences, in life-trends and specific ends, between one individual and another.
   Thirdly, every individual life is governed by his own action which is really a continuing stream. Whatever had been done in the past will react on the present life and its action, and present actions would similarly influence the course of future life. As a matter of fact, the doctrin of Rebirth and the Law of Karma is complementary. Karma and Rebirth together determine man's future life or destiny. That is why human life is said to be pre-ordained.
   But this is only an explanation of the origin of life-process­ an indication of its future course. We are also to examine how the influence of planets, their aspects and degrees of interrelation determines and shapes the original crust or pattern. Once we adopt the analytical method, we shall see that a person's life which appeared to be so much predestined is not as rigidly bound as assumed.
   Judicious examination would reveal that human life is not completely enmeshed by predestination. An individual has ome scope of exercising Free-Will. If he can strive for his goal through discipline and exercise of Will he can by sustained effort attain truely superhuman heights.
   Now such a statement may appear to be limiting the accuracy of astrological prediction. So, it requires more clarification. Astrology as a discipline does not depend on 'accident'. If its success really depended on coincidence or was determined in a "post-hoc, ergo-propter hoc" fashion, then it could not survive. as it has done through all those centuries since prehistoric times.
   As systematised knowledge Astrology is obviously based on axioms and principles which may look  somewhat nebulous to a realistic objective eye.  The real point is this that a subject of study whose roots go deep, whose problem is to lift the mystery veiling the face of truth which bas to be discovered through the clear vision of super-science can not be grasped and perceived by a mind that lacks cultivation and is dimmed by common superstition.  The value of our beliefs or disbeliefs

20	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE

is largely  determined by question of material gain and self-interest.
   Let us suppose, for arguments' sake, that we donot believe in the efficacy of astral influences. But if, inspite of that, it is possible to get a more or less correct picture of the important incidents of our lives by considering the position ot our birth­ 'Stars' or by reading the role of planets and their contributions then the question of our faith or doubt becomes really irrelevant. If again some prediction does not come out true in a particular context or in some specific situations, it is quite likely that the influence of a particular planet escaped the astrologer's notice, or it may be that his knowledge was limited or conditioned. It has been said that human existence and heavenly bodies are equally encompassed by an all-pervading spirit and knowledge. Hence the nearer the astrologer comes to that Supreme S;,irit or Knowledge or shares it, he can. to that extent hope to succeed in unravelling the mystery of existence, a truth behind it.
   Nc.w the question arises-if Karma is all determined by the planets, also if Karma determines the evolution of individual lives, their purpose and retrocession by which the present becomes the past and the present blazes a trial in the future, then why should the same Karma produce the different results in different individual Ii ves ? 'The hostility of planets' a phrase which we hear or use so often, means exactly this. What we call the mystery of creation is certainly a mystery, but not in the sense that it is all meaningless or purposeless, or significanceleas. The significance and the meaning of creation are rooted in premordial past and consistency of it all-the last day of creation (if there is any last day), the grand culmination of the first day of creation [if ever there was any first day) reflect the sway of sovereign intelligence and design, The planets themselves derive their authority from the same grand cavalcade, the unceasing procession of events which constitute the creative evolution. The purpose and the significance of creation, organic or individual sway the evolutions of individual live;;, the planets being used as instruments for specific accomplishments of parts of the design. The planetary charts for individual lives are so contrived that each individual life is different, but sum total of

HINDU SCIBNCE OF THE FUTURE	21
 them all contributes to the working out the ultimate pattern. Thus Karma is not the beginning of the unfoldment of any particular virtue or strength, not a cause but an effect. Each tiny act in an individual life operates within the frame work of that particular life and produces varient results according to the placing of the various planets in that chart. The subtle shades and nuances of the results of each act thus vary according to differences in the individual horoscope. And it is impossible to say off-hand what effect any particular act to produce in variant contexts of individual destinies. That is why the Great Poet Kalidas observes in the first chapter of his Uttarakalamitra that only the creator knows the whole meaning and the significance of the mystery of life.
   It may he asked whether, if that isso, Astrology denies human free will and volition. The question is a common one, but not compulsive.
   The denial of free will need not he assumed. Individual human life is itself a part of the cosmic mystery which of course is inexplicable and predestined. But that does not mean that within the  narrow  limits  of  each  individual  life,  there is no scope for free will. In a larger sense. free will may he predetermined, being the resultant of the particular placing of the planets, But to each individual is left a margin of option to decide between the one course of action and another. It is not given to man to see the ultimate seeds; a few steps are always enough for him before the shadows close in and witltin the narrow compass he is left to exercise his 'Free Will'. "Free Will" may thus he an ultimate illusion, hut very much a real guide as far as the small shining space which we call life­ between a sleep and a sleep is concerned. The most fragmatic working view of it all may be summed up in the following stanza from Mathew Arnold :
''I say, fear not
Life still leaves human effort scope But since life teems with ill
Nurse no extravagant hope Because thou must not dream Thou needst not then despair."

CHAPTER-I
SOLAR SYSTEM

   Hindu Astronomy considers Solar System in reference to its constituents, the 9 planets and tb.e stars ( Nakshatras or Constellations). This is only a fragment of the solar system we know and there are other solar systems beyond it. It is given to man, it is not possible for him to know of the vast firmament as a whole. He has to be content with only a very tiny fragment. The 9 planets are:-
   Ravi (Sun), Chandra (Moon), Mangal (Mars), Budha (Mercury), Vrhaspati (Jupiter), Sukra (Venus), Sani (Saturn), Rahu (Dragon's head) and Ketu (Dragon's tail).
   Yet it must be noted that the planet does not have the same meaning in Astronomy and Astrology. The Moon in Astronomy reflects light from the Sun; but in Astrology they rank the same. The Dragon's head and Dragon's tail are just the nodal points beyond which they have no other form of existence. Yet Astrology ranks them as full-scale planets, on parity with the rest.
   The Sun is at the centre of his system which is called his. The other planets are revolving round. the Sun but the Sun also is in a state of constant motion on his axis. And the whole cavalcade or procession is also in a state of incessant motion. The Eartb. we live in is also a planet, and in addition to the nine said already. Western astrologers name 3 other planets Herschel or Uranus, Neptune and Pluto .so that the total works out as 12. Hindu Astrologers do not know much of Herschel, Neptune and Pluto.  The Earth bas one Moon against 4 for Jupiter.

Earth, the Planets and the Stars
Prithivee, Graha and Nakshatras
   As is well-known, the earth takes 24 hrs. to turn on its axis and 365 days and 6 hrs. to circumambulate the Sun once.  As a result of these motions the phenomena which we call sunrise

SOLAR SYSTBM	23
and sunset takes place. In reality there is neither, but for all practical purposes, including astrological, they are very much a part of reckoning.
  The Zodiac has no beginning or end, it is just a circle of li ht. In order to measure the distance an arbitrary point is considered and taken into account, which is the first point of Aries (Mesa Rasi). The Zodiac is marked by 27 Constellations or Nakshatras. The first point of Aswini, the first Nakshatra coincides with the first point of Mesa which is starting point of Zodiac.
   Nakshatras: The mathematical system which is the foundation of Hindu Astrology in fact all subsequent Astrology, considers 27 Nakshatras and 12 Rasis (signs). Like the invention of Zero, this is another marvellous product of Hindu Astronomy and Astrology, that is to say, of Hindu Mathematics, a major achievement in the exact sciences.
   Another fundamental basis of Hindu calculations is the ecliptic, that is, the path of the Sun. It has been seen from numerous observations and deduced that within 8 degrees on either side of the ecliptic the presence of Nakshatras and planets effects and inti uences results.
  The influence of the Sun as it passes along the ecliptic tincture with the results of other planets and Nakshatras near enough to influence and determine the career or destiny of creatures on earth.
   It is the job of Astrology to assess the nature and extent of these influences, as far as possible precisely. Each Rasi is 30 degrees and the total ecliptic 360 degrees. 8 degrees to the North of the ecliptic and 8 degrees to the South are taken along with the ecliptic itself and all the Nakshatras that fall within this rnnge are also considered simultaneously. The Nakshatras divided into 12 Houses work out at 21/4 Nakshatras for each house. And each Nakshatra has 13 degrees and 20 minutes (Kalas). The Sun travels roughly I degree in each day and 12 houses that is 360 degrees in 360 days.

24	HINDU SCIENCE OP THE FUTURE
(I) List of n Rasis and 27 Nakshatras.




Symbol.
8
II
$
nv
£b
nt
l
"1
3€


   There arc twelve Bhavas which constitute a Rasi-Chakra or Birth Chart. The bhavas are to be counted from lagna in anti cl0ckwise way, The names of the twelve bhavas are stated here below :-Tanu or Lagna (1st bhava), Dhana (2nd bhava), Sahaja (3rd bhava), Sukha (4th bhava), Putra (5th bhava), Satru (6th bhava), Jaya (7tlil bhava), Mrityu or Nidhan (8th bhava), Bhagya (9th bhava), Karma (10th bhava), Ayaya (11th bhava), Vyaya (12th bhava), Significance of these twelve bhavas will be dealt with elaborately at the time of delineation of twelve bhavas in Chapter IV and V, At present we are giving in short tho significance of twelve bhavas.
   (I) Tanu-Physical body. head, health, complexion, character and conduct etc.
(2) Dhana-Wcalth and accumulated  wealth, speech, eye,
face, teeth, relatives, food etc.
  (3) Sahaja-Brother and Sister, effort, courage, servants, tenacity etc.
   (4) Sukha-Education, happiness, mother, heart prosperity, friend, mind, qualities, house, vehicles, conveyance etc.
(5) Potra-Children, intellect, merit, talent, virtue, belly and
inte,tine etc.

SOLAR SYSTEM	25
  (6) Satru-Enemy, hostility, obstacle, litigation, maternal uncle, disease etc,

   (7) Jaya-Marriage, wife and Sexual act, business journey etc.

or husband, married life, Sex and	trade,	business-partner,

   (8) Mrityu or Nidhana-Death, longivity, litigation, speculative act, imprisonment, misery, family troubles, Genital organ, abdomen, rectum, palatial building, ancestral property, wealth acquired through lottery etc.
   (9) Bhagya-Fortune, religion, religious acts, ascetism, journey to holy shrine, grace of spiritual guide, father, previous birth, long journey etc.
   (IO) Karma-Profession, vocation, dignity, reputation, positional influence, fame acquired through brilliant academic career, wealth of father, environment etc.
  (11) Ayaya-Earning, income, profiteering, friend and relatives, elder brother and sister, peaceful condition etc.
   (12) Vyaya--Expenditure, left foot and eye, material enjoyment, sacrificial act, bed-room comfort, punishment inflicted by government, downfall etc.
(2) Nakshatra (Constellations)   14. Chitra-Virginis Spica
I. As wini -Arietus	15. Swati-Bootis Arcturus
2. Bharani-Arietisa Mus	16.  Visaka-Librae
3. Krithika-Tauri Alcyoni	17. Anuradha-
Scorpionis
4. Rohini-Tauri  Aldebaran	18.  Jyesta-Aritares
5. Mrigasira-Orionis	19.  Moola-Scorpionis
6. Aridra (Adra)-,,	20. Pu rvashadha- Sagittarii
7. Punarvasu-Gemini Pollux	21.  Uttarashadha- ,.
8. Pushyami or Pushya-Cancri	22. Sra vana-Aquilae
9·  Aslesha-Hydrae	23.  Dhanishta-Delphini
10. Makha (Magha)-Leonis Regulas  24.  Satabhisha-Aquarii
II. Purba Falguni-Leonis	25.  Purvabhadra-Pegasi
12. Uttar Falguni-  ,,	26. Uttarbhadra-
13. Hasta-Corvi	27. Revatbi-Piscium.

26	HINDU SCIENCE OF THS FUTURE
(3) Symhol1 of Planets
I.	Ravi, Surya(Sun)
2. Chandra (Moon)
3. Mangal (Mars)
4. Budha (Mercury)
5. Vrhaspati (Jupiter)
6. Sukra (Venus) Sani (Saturn)
8. Rahu (Dragon's head or ascending1 Node)
9. Ketu (Dragon's tail or descending Node)
10. Indra or Prajapati (Herschel or Uranus)
11. Varuna (Neptune)
12. Rudra, Yama (Puto)
13. Prithivi (Earth)



0
l)
d'

2f.

-
&,

tff- 'E

   The learner of predictive Astrology has to master, at the outset, the nature of 12 Houses and 27 Nakshatras and 9 Planets and is also of the Lagna which is the position of the earth in the east at the time of birth of a child.
   The various and subtle conduct of each of the planets bas also to be learnt. It cannot be too strongly emphasised that this is based on very minute observations in a vast number of cases with encyclopedic knowledge as the subjacent instrument of research. How the planets behave is called 'Karakata1.

The 'Pecking order among the Rasis'
   All four-footed Rasis except the Simha are subordinate to the two.footed Rasis. The aquatic Rasis are edibles for two-footed Rasis and creeping Rasis as well as the aquatic ones subject to the domination of the two-footed. Simha Rasi claims supremacy over all except the creeping Rasis like Vrscika (Scorpio),. Karkata (Cancer) etc.

¦ OLAR SYSTEM	27
  The physical parts of Kalpurush (Zodical Signs) Mesa-Head	Tula-The lower part of Naval.
Vrsa-Face	Vrscika-Rectum.
Mithune-Arms	Dhanu-Thigh
Karkata-Heart	Makara-Knee
Simha-belly	Kumbha-Shinbone, from region below
Knee and within feet where there are tebia bones.
Kanya-Loin, Waist.	Mina-Feet
   (If benefic planets have favourable influences on these parts of the Kalpurus the native derives beneficial results and if otherwise the result so far these parts are concerned is not to be favourable).

List of benefic and malefic Planets
   Ravi, Mangat, Sani, Rahu, and Ketu are malefic planets. From 8th day of the dark Moon upto the 8th day of the bright Moon Chadra is malefic and from the 8th day of the bright moon upto the 8th day of the dark, Chandra is benefic. Budha when conjoined with a malefic is considered as a malefic planet, otherwise he is a benific. Only Vrhaspati and Sukra are natural benific Planets.

Planetary Relations
   Of these nine planets some of them are friends to each other, some are enimical and some are neutrals. So, relations of planets may be termed.as Friendship, Enmity and Neutral. Friendship may be both permanent and temporary.
  Here below the relations ol planets among themselves are shown:-
Permanent Friendship etc :­

Friends
Ravi (Sun)	Chandra, Mangat,
Vrhaspati.
Chandra	Ravi, Budha

Enemies	Neutrals
Sani, Sukra.	Budha

None	All other Planets.

   Vrhaspati, Chandra,	Sani, Sukra Ravi.

Budha

28	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE



Budha

Friends
Ravi, Sukra

Enemies
Chandra

Nenuals Mangal, Vrhaspati, Sani.

Vrhaspati	Ravi, Chandra,
Mangal.
Sukra	Budha, Sani

Sani	Budha, Sukra

Rahu	Sukra, Sani

Ketu	Ra vi, Chandra, Mangal.

Budha. Sukra  Sani

Ravi, Candra  Mangal,
             Vrhaspati. Ravi, Chandra, Vrhaspati Mangal.
Ravi, Chandra, Budha, Man gal.	Vrhaspati. S>Jkra, Sani.		ditto.

   Besides natural friendship planets become temporary friends by virtue of their relative position in houses or ,signs. Planets become temporary friends if they are posted in the 2nd, 4th, 10th, 11th and 12th signs from any other planets, In the remaining signs planets become temporary enemies. While judging a horoscope both the types of relation should be considered carefully.
   Term permanent friend is called Naisargika Mitra, Temporary friend Tatkalika Mitra. So, Naisargika Mitra or Permanent friend and Tatkalika  Mitra  together  means  'Adhi  Mitra' or Bosom friend. Table of friendship, Enmity, temporary friendship or enmity etc. is shown below :­

Permanent friend	and	Temporary	friend
friend {Naisargika Mitra)

together	Basom
{adhi Mitra)


Permanent frien,J	,.
t,	Enemy	,,
"	,,	"
.,.,	Neutral ,,

,,	enemy	..
..	enemy	..
·•	..	..
friend	,,

Ne.u.tral (Sa.m. a)
Great enemy (Adhi Satru) Enemy {Satru) Friend (Mitra) etc.

Allocation of Planetary Rnlenhlp.
   Excepting Ravi and Chandra all other five planets are lords or owners of two Rasis or signs each. Ravi and Chandra own one Rasi each.

SOLAR SYSTEM	29
Ravi	Owner or lord of Simha Rasi Sukra owner or lord of Chandra		., Karkata	Vrsa & Tula Rasis.
Mangal	,, Mesa and	Sani owner  or Lord of
Vrscika Rasis.	Makar & Kumbha
Rasis
Budha	.. ,, Mithune and Kanya Rasis
Vrhaspati	"	"	,, Dhanu and
Mina Rasis.
  In short we may describe the ownership of planets in the following manner :
   Mesa and Vrscika arc ruled by Mangal; Vrsa and Tula by Sukra; Mithune and Kanya are governed by Budha; Vrhaspnll rules Dhanu and Mina; and Makara and Kumbba are owned or ruled by Sani. Ravi governs Simha and Chandra. rules Karkata.

Exaltation and Mooltrikone signs of Planets
Exaltation.
   Ravi is exalted in the 10th degree of Mesa, of course the entire Mesa Rasi is his exalted sign.
Chandra is exalted in the 3rd degree of Vrsa Rasi
Mangat	,,	,,	,,  ,, 28th  ,,	,, Makar '\  tbe entire Rasi
is his exalted sign.
Budha	,,	,,	,,	., 15th  .,	., Kanya Rasi.
  (Budha bas some pecularities in this respect. Budha's Mooltrikona begins after 15 degree of Kanya Rasi and extends upto 25th degree, the remaining 5 degree is his own house i.e. Kshetra as we call it.)
Vrha1pati is exalted in the 5th degree of Karkata   Rasi,   the
entire Rasi is his exa•.ted house.
Sukra ,,	27th	Mina Rasi, the entire Rasi is his exalted sign.
s ni	"  "  " " 20th  "  " Tula Rasi, the entire Rahu   ,.  "  .. " 20:h "  ,. Mithune
Ketu	"    "

30	HINDU SCJBNCB OF THE FUTURE
   • Rahu's own house is Kanya, His mooltrikona house is Kumbha, Ketu's own house is Mina and Simha is bis Mooltrikona house. According to Maharsi Parasara Rahu is exalted in Vrsa Rasi, Ketu is exalted in Vrscika Rasi. Mithune and Karkata Rasis are Rahu's Mooltrikona signs and Dhanu is Ketu's Mooltrikona Kshetra.

Mooltrikona
Ravi is in Mooltrikona in the first 20 degrees in Simha Rasi and
the remaining part is own house.

Chandra,,
.Mangal ,,
Budba	.,

Vrhaspati ,,

.,.,
,,

,.

,,	,,	last 27	,,
,,  ,.,  first 12	,,
,,  .,. after 15

,,	.,  first 10	"

of Vrsa Rasi.
,, Mesa ,,
to 25th degrees of Kanya Rasi.
of Dhanu, the last
20 degrees are his own house (kshetra).

Sukra	.,	,,	"	15	,. Tula, the last 15 degrees  in	his
own house.
Sani	,,	,, 20	in	Kumbha,	the remaining part is
his Kshetra.
Debilitation (Nicha} house :-
   The 7th house or the 180th degree from exaltation point is the point of debilitation. Ravi is debilitated in the 10th degree of Tula' and Chandra in the 3rd degree of Vrscika and so on.
Aspects
   Each planet has good or evil influence on an individual. Their influence is modified to a great extent by sympathetic or antipathic aspect on planets or houses of the birth chart. Hence aspect of planets is an important thing to be considered first. Aspects are counted from sign to sign. They are good or bad, as the case may be, according 10 relation between the aspecting and the aspected planet. Malefic or benific planets when aspecting a bhava-yields good or evil influence as the case may be,

SOLAR SYS!rEM	31
- The table of aspects is drawn below for ready reference:
Full aspect.	I Three-fourth	H U	aspect. f One-fourth
a.evect.	a pect.
Ravi	7th.  house  from	4th & 8th	5th &9th houses 3rd & 10th
his position.	houses from his f?om his	houses f:rom
position.	position.	his position.
Chandra	do	do	do	do
Mangal	4th, 7th & 8th	do	do ,
houses from his
position.
Budha	7th. house	do	do	do

Vrhaepoll


Sukra

Sani


Rabu

5th., 7th & 9th	do houses from his
position.
7th. house from his	do position.
3rd, 7th. & 10th.	do houses from his
position.
5th, 7th, 9th & 12th	do houses from his
position.

X	do


do	do
do	X

X	do


Ketu has no aspect as he is considered to be blind.
   According to Maharshi Parasar Ravi, Chandra, Budba and Sukra each bas full aspect on the 7th house, Mangal has one-fourth aspect, Vrhaspati half aspect and Sani three-fourth aspect on  the  7th house.  Ketu  too has similar  aspect like Rahu.
   According to Venkateswar Daivaogya Rahu and Ketu have full aspect on the 7th house only.

CHAPTBR-11
PECULIARITIES OF RASIS EXPLAINED
   Mesa Rasl : Head of Kalapurusb, very noisy, harsh voice, rough appearance, strong determination, diligent, arrogant, lascivious, likes pomp and grandeur, moves hither and thither, sensitive, brave.
It has a challenging attitude, likes to involve itself in betting,
dashing, clashes with opponents, its protest is not merely vocal, it does not feel shy to protest with physical force.
It tends to stop the opponent with head or  chest, it  ia
arrogance personified, it exerts itself completely to attain the thing desired and to get that thing it may fight unto its last breath, fiery warfare, ball of fire, fiery arms and armaments, wealth plundered during war, fertile land where grains are grown in abundance, deaf and stammerer, constipation, diseases relating	biles, Venereal	disease, stricture, fire that helps digestion of food, top of mountain.	It is a store house of kinetic energy.
   This is the first sign or rasi of the Zodiac, consists of Aswini, Varani and t part of Krittika nakshatras. Lord is Mangal, Symbol is a Ram.
   Vrsa Rasi: Lord is Sukra, Symbol is a bull. It is sober and obstinate, it is as if immovable or can not be moved easily. In mythology the God Siva is considered to be sober but obstinate. He can not be activised easily. So, bull is his conveyance. The rasi is conservative, it does not care any body else, it is full of ego, its gait and movement speak of its nature and temperament.
   Attributes are :-pouring, effervescent, discharge, emit, impregnate, making fertile, grow, beget or to be begotten, to be vexed, to chastise, to give profusely, manhood and manliness, productive power, leadership, moral qualities, egoist, sobriety, sanctimonious hypocrite, childless woman or a woman having manly nature, encouragement, impetuousness, beauty, sweet odour

PECULIARITIES OF BASIS EXPLAINED	33

(fragrance) patience. This rasi comprises of£ part of Krittika, Robini and 1/2 of Mrigasira Nakshatras.
   It pertakes of the qualities of Rohini Nakshatra that repre­ sents good dressing, and using extra quality toilet-products to look beautiful. Mrigasira Nakshatra. represents sexual acts, calm and cool temper, and also cruelty, The rasi speaks of personality of a native, it is sober, has immense strength to forbear tbe onslaught of attack from the opponent. The rasi is full of self-conceit.
If it is influenced  by malefic  planet  t!J.e result  referred to
above is reversed. It represents Tamo guna, indicates throat, ears, thumb and scrotum of Kalapurus.
   Mithuna Rasi: Joyful, normally a pleasant talker. Its Lord is Budha, symbol the twin figure of a man and a woman. The rasi consists of i mrigasira, Adra and i Poonarbasu Nakshatras. From the symbol it can be imagined easily that there is a dual
personality in it. It represents the middle stage of frivolity and sobriety.  There is a dualism in it.  The store-house of creation in a woman and creative power of a man are mixed up in 11. So, conservatism of a woman and frivolous nature and power of renovation of a man are found in it.
   Attributes:  Mixture, conjoining of things, twin, a man and a woman, dualism, indecisive mind, oscilla:ion, working together in a friendly atmosphere. In tbe reverse way to quarrel with colleagues, or dual fight. In another way it may mean sexual intercourse, companionship between a man and woman, mysteriously going to a secret place.
   Wisdom, intelligence of Budha and his calmness are found in this rasi, softness, lively beauty of Mrigasira Nakshatra, wisdom of "Adra" and creative source of Poonarvasu are found in abundance in this rasi.
This  rasi represents  the  middle stage of  happiness and
miseries. Thi& peculiar feeling in a man cannnot be described easily.
It indicates twc shoulders, arms and hands of Kalapurus.
  Karkata Rasi: Cool, good talker, large flabby body, intelligent, temperate, barren. Lcrd is Chandra, symbol crab. Consists of 1 of Poonarnsu, Pusya and Aslesha Nakshatras. It is a watery
rasi and is a reservoir of energy.  Thirefore it is a complete
3

34	HINDU SCIENCE OF THe FUTURE
manifestation of kinetic force. As it is a watery sign, it par­ takes the character of sentimentalism and at times effervesce exuberantly, or overflow and flows so fiercely that it breaks through all the obstacles that befall on its way. When obstruct­ ed it is filled up with sentimental foelings and carries away everything with it and destroys all obstructions. It is then impossible to check its current. If it does not face any obstruc­ tion even then it becomes full with sentimental feelings but it dies down silently within it. The sign is introspective. Its lord Chandra also is a sentimental planet. The sign represents idealism. It is fanciful, affectionate,  sympathetic and cool
in nature.
   It is versatile, artistic, joyous, lively, highly intellectual, lightly influenced by ideas, gives pleasure to others, joking, flowing with murmuring sound, spreading, boiling, blooming, invig rating, a cocoanut fruit-a thing the exterior of which is hard and strong hut the inner contents are watery and fluid, sticking to a thing, to be very much friendly to one who is in its own liking, to take the shape of something, to sacrifice for other's cause, philosophising, to scan others' qualities and frailties, phlegmatic constitution, to fall ill due to slight cold, sceptic habit, unworldly, always looking everything from ideal­ istic point of view, truthfulness, noble-mindedness, cleanliness,
beauty, fame, independence, freedom and liberty, endlessness, to invigorate, fertilisation, flabbiness.
   If m•lefically influenced-to surround secretly, to render unholy or unclean, worried mind due to cliquish temperament, to poison. Chest and Lungs of Kalapurus.
   Simba Rasi : Hot (Not so hot as Mesa Rasi), determination, diligent, greedy, angry, addiction to sensual pleasure, brave, moving, likes a few companions, high sounding, harsh but grave voice, appearance full of gravity, tall figure, not fertile.
   Its Lord is Ravi (Sun), symbol is a lion. It consists of Magha, Poorbafalgooni and t of Uttarfalgooni. The sign is full of glamour and light. Its shining glamour as if lights up every• thing around it. It is a fixed sign. So, it is not frivolous but full of life. It is a creative sign. This is the only sign that has the gravity of a tall·banian tree. It is a fiery sign but has no burn­ ing quality of Mesa rasi. It has the character of a Lord, a king,

l'ECOLIARl'.r!ES OF RASIS EXPLAINED	35

.ind it is majestic in style and gait. Though full of ego its personality attracts others. Woman of Sim ha rasi (if Chandra is
·situated in this sign) is not liked by astrologers as she is full of pride and likes to lord over others. To win over everything, always strives hard to win over all kinds of obstacles, to want supremacy, patience, powerful, to show respect, dignity, bravery, kind, prosperous, it is accorded highest honour, to establish its own reputation, patronage, to give shelter to others, to protect those whom it gives shelter.
Heart and stomach of Kalapurus.
   Kanya Rasi :	Calm, pleasant talker, tall figure, intelligent, barren (unfertile), cold, green colour.  Lord is Budha (Mercury),
-symbol-a virgin girl standing on a floating boat with a bunch of ears of corn in one hand.
Nakshatra-Vttarfalgooni, Hasta  and ! Chitra.  The rasi is
a mixture of 'Satwa' and 'tamo' gunas.  It is sometimes joyous
and at other times grave.  A virgin, chaste girl, fully grown up
,young just a blooming youth, a woman of bright complexion, innocent girl. Beauty, decent, soft, to grow joyful and obedient, to be pleased, to hanker after, to be admired by any other person, benevolence, beamining with knowledge, to give vent to one's feeling decently, to be enlivened by learning, to dispel darkness, painting, artist, skilful,  imagination, to accomplish any work
:properly, doubt, want of faith, want of deep thinking, uncertainty, to float like a floating boat, to analyse and judge a thing accurately, advise, culture of knowledge. any pleasurable
·sensation, amorous.
Intestine aud waist region of Kalapurush.
Tola Rasi:  Warm, full of sound, even but pleasant talker,
,::aim, tall figure.  Lord is Sukra (Venus), symbol is a man with a
,cale in his band weighing something.
   Nakshatra-1/2 Chitra, Swati and 3/4 Visakha.  It has the speed of wind (vayu), many-sided, characteristic of spreading hither and. thither, to compare, to examine or scrutinise, to counter­ balance, to possess in the same degree, tribunal, assessment of real worth, business, buying and selling, store house, scale, al ways restless, unsteady in a place, to roam, to establish a self-idealism, 6ocial, an active worker, to like to lord over others, tools or impleme•its to analyse a thing, to accomplish a work, to remain

36	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
engaged in various types of work, changing, assortment. systematise.
Kidney and buttok of Kalapurush.
   Vscika Rasi : White colour, phlegmatism, fertile, stammerer or dumb, inaudible tongue, tall figure Tamo guna. Lord is Mangal (Mars), symbol is Scorpion-like creature.
   Nakshatra-} Visakha, Anuradha and Jestha. Conservatism, Inertia. It is a watery sign, therefore, there is some sort of restlessness in it. If m t with any obstruction from outside agent it reacts sharply. It is an introspect sign. Its ugly appearance is not manifested if its feeling is not wounded. It gets angry and restless like a scorpion. It has the acute tendency to bm the opponent. It is full of ego, and crookedness. Under an ad versa condition it becomes cruel and hurts its opponent fiercely. When it becomes very enraged and annoyed with its opponent but is unable to take vengeance it gets very much agitated and the vehemence is consumed within itself and the sentiment dies down. It is the n ,gative sign of Man gal. Hence malefic character of this planet is very mucll evident in this sign. The autocratic temp.!rament, oversensitiveness and arrogance of Mangat is manifested in the Vscika Rasi.
To pierce, to cui into pieces, to sting, to poison, to spoil, to
destroy, to wipe out, to smitten with bitter words. to bring disaster to somebody, loss due to some inimical work of others. The Rasi is prominently unpopular for its cruel characteristic, but it d'>es not care other's criticism and faces everything stubbornly and challenges its critics. Anything that causes obstrnction, ta fight. An extremist and critic, an upsetter of existing ideas and ways of living, and where it cannot do this, a sarcastic and cynical critic.
   Irs beneficial characteristics arc to love or be affectionate, to arrange th;ngs, to adorn, to be alert, to guard, to act as a police.
Generotiva and cxc:etory organs of Kalapurush.
   Dhanu Rasi: Determined, diligent, restless, pompous, want of foresight, greedy, noisy, harsh talker, calm, composed, pleasant talker, medium height, imprudent, lack of foresight.
   Lord is Vrhaspati (Jupiter). Symbol is horse (front pocion of tr.e body) with a rider on its back anJ armed ,,·ith bow and arrow (Its front p rt is quadruped).

PECULIARITIES OF HASIS EXPLAINED	37
   Nakshatra-Moola, Poorbasarha, and 3/4 Uttarasarah. The negative sign of Vrhaspati. It is more materialistic than spiritualistic. It indic4tes energy and represents kinetic force.
-From the symbol the character is evident, Universality invincible spirit, "The archer points out his shaft at higher and better things. The sign of a seer and prophet, idealist, aspirant to a life of devotion. The appearance of tne sign is warlike which it really is. Per5ons born under its influence are fiery and warlike in nature. En:lowed with great strength, the Sagittarious are highly intelligent, respected for their good qualities." Vide Astri-Magazine, Feb, '51. It is not lover of imagination, because it has to proceed through many obstacks, mountainous  regi ms
and defeat its enemies. So it is a practical idealist sign. It is a sign of animal and man. So, the animal is controlled by highest knowledge and wisdom of a man. It is a searcher of knowledge and truth. Nakshatra Moola speaks of animal power, and Poorba and Uttarasarha represent energy, calmness, perseverance and truth, speed, to proceed with highest speed, to shoot arrows, bow and arrow, to pierce through the mark, to shatter all sorts of obstructions, lo search for light, to be armed with w apons, endowed with merits. Encouragement, bravery that gives impetus to others, to know the source of all Sciences, arts and truth or to practise devotional austerities to know all,
Hips, buttock, thigh of Kalapurush.
   Makar Rasi: Perseverent, diligent, industrious, restless, foppish, lover of a few companions, addicted to sensual pleasures, brave, very noisy, high suund, harsh voice, medium figure.
Lord is Sani (Saturn).  Symbol-the front portion is a goat,
and the hinder part is that of a crocodile.
Nakshatra-1 Uttarasarha, Sravana and i Dhanistha.
   It is a cardinal sign no doubt but it is not a high-speed sign. This can be easily imagined from the appearance of its symbol. It can hardly move on a plain. The movement is slow but sure. It has earnestness to reach its goal in spite of obstacles that may befall on its way. It represents matter and material thing but it is industrious and a sure climber. It proceeds breaking through obstructions or move in a zig-zag way to avoid them.  The
·structure of the body shows that it cannot be indiscip.ined. Materialistic,  disciplinarian, and  an  expert  industrialist,

38	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
uriver sality, a social figure, to settle into definite form of mind, t<> create, letting loose, builder of a career, the sign of a businessman who is sometimes exacting to the point of dishonesty, a politician.
Knees of Kalapurush.
   Kumbha Rasi: Warm, rheumatic and bilious constitution, calm and gentlo, noisy, normal talker, short figure.
Lord is Sani ( Saturn ),  Symbol is a man with a waterful
pitcher on his shoulder.
   Nakshatra-\ Dhanistha, Satabhisa and i Poorbavad.rapada. Symbol indicates that it is sobre, has an end in view and always alert and careful.  It has confidence in itself, and is earnest in its undertakings.		The pitcher is a significan, sign no doubt. Because if it looses its confidence in itself, be a bit careless or be less earnest it is not possible to move with a pot full of water. For if his attention is in any way diverted the water of the pitcher will fall down.	Moreover, its path and goal is fixed.
It has a great attraction for them. The discipline, fixity of purpose and slow but sure progress of Sani is found in the nature of this Rasi,
Earnestness, carefulness, to fill up, to cover, two different
:Cinds, to fill up with water or air, to move on a fixed goal. conservation, selfishness, prominence in the upper part of the, forehead, self-indnlgence, heart trouble, abundance.
Shanks of legs of Kalapurush.
   Mina Rasi:  Day and night, calm, soft, silent, dumb or­ stammerer, restless mind, intelligent, faithful, impatient, slow and steady, short figure.	It represents Satwa guna.
   Nakshatra-1/4 Poorbavadrapada, Uttarvadrapada and Rebati. It is the last rasi of the Zodiac. Lord is Vrhaspati. Symbol is two fishes in the deep sea-kissing each other's tail.
   A sea has two appearances.	Externally it is violent and restless, but its bottom is calm and cool. Its external appearancc speaks of restlessness, sentimentalism, roaring sound etc.,• but the bottom is calm but dangerous. There lies all kinds of Jewels. The two fishes, as if bathe deep in water and are influenced by each other's senti.ment. So, this rasi is mrnifested within itself, the exuberance in the outer region is not its own real feeling.
   To be joyful, to be actuated by sentiments, to be happy, to be comfortable, to be agitated, to be haughty, to prosper step by step

PECULIARITIES OF NAKSHATRAS	39

or by bopping, to flow intermittently, to sink deep into water, to think of one's emancipation, to be influenc d, itching, eczema, bunches of curling hair. The wife of the person having this Rasi dies an early death or becomes paralysed, and the native gets married again, "a restless and creative mind with romantic and imaginative outlook necessary for successful writer of fiction. liable to be obsessed with curious fancies. Pisces ( Mina Rasi ) is the sign of artist and author." Diseases relating to urine, diseases of the intestine or stomach.
Two feet, ankles of Kalapurush.


PECULIARITIES OF NAKSHATRAS
( Nakshatras' Karakata)
   I 3m not aware of the existence of any original systematic exposition of sidereal influences and effects of Nakshatras. I do not know of any secondary compilation either. Besides Astrology, the Vedas, the Puranas, the Mahabharata etc. provide occasional hints, glimpses and insights which have to be colated, in order to appreciate the importance of the stars ( Nakshatras)
-a  tentative examination follows.
   It has been said already that each Rasi extends over 21/4 stars (Nakshatras) in the zodiacal space ; which is the same as saying that 21/4 Stars make up each Rasi. It would foliow from this that the influence of the stars should help us to determine the nature and the influence of Rasi itself. It is necessary however to enter upon 'Caveat'. The sidereal effect is by no means the whole of the Rasi-elfect, though is certainly a large ingredient of it. The Stars certainly influence the Rasi.
   The Mesa Rasi consists of Aswini, Bharavi and Krithika. The first two is 13°-20' each and the third one is 3°-20', the remaining 10° degree is in Vrsa Rasi.
   Aswini Nakshatra: 'Devata' for Aswini Nakshatra is Aswi or the Duality known as Aswini Kumar Twins, the physician of the Gods. Symbol-the head of a horse. So, by the influence of this star the native is expected to be equestrian (horse-ride) or a soldier, also a physician with marvellous power to heal. The after-speak of physician's excellence or process. It is possible, in the horoscopes of these physicians it will be ,een that the.

40	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FCTURE
planet for successful medical practice is positioned in Aswini Naks'Jatra.	From Aswi is supposed to be derived carraiges for animals for transport, everything related to transport and transport department.	The Puranas relate that the two A swini Kumaras were born of mother Sanga and father Ravi. The '11other held the solar semen in her nostrils, for otherwise she could not hold it, it is so strong. They are the twins of Sanga and therefore this Nakshatra is supposed to produce twins. Mangal in this Nakshatra-specially if the Lagna is in Kumbha and Mangat in bhatristhan indicates twin brother and sister for the native. Or if Ravi, Vrhaspati or Pitri Karaka or lord of the bhava signffying father or son in a similar way is in this Nakshatra then the father or any of the uncles or any of the children may be one of the twin.
   Bbarani Nak;hatra :  Devata Yama; birth star of  Rahu. lt extends from 13'-20' to 26'-40',
Symbol :  Orifice of the womb (oss-mouth), lord Mangal.  It
is possible to have an idea of the nature of Bharavi Nakshatra from the nature of Rahu, Mangat and Yama. To take Rahu first,
1. Rahu  gives extravagant  enjoyment  of material pleasure
and is hter on the cause of sorrow,
2. Mangal gives courage, strength, exaltation and hope,
   3. Yama purity, cleanliness, justice and integrity. The sense of restraint is also Yama's gift ; he is the lord of Dharma, a stern disciplinarian, a ruthless expositor of truth, and a refuge for kings and law-abiding subjects.	We should not always confine his interpretation to his being only the lord of death; he is the great 'judicature', the ultimate dispenser of reward and punis:iment.	The story of 'Yama-Nachiketa' is a particularly exposition of the hospitality of Yama, his sense of dharma and knowledge of it, his superb honesty and great integrity and other divine virtues. The Nakshatra of which he is the devata (God) is also in consequence the giver of enjoyment and pleasures, courage and upward thrust of the spirit and on the other hand the giver of whatever is good, pure, truthful and honest.
   The etymological meaning of Bharani is "what deserves to be cultivated and preserved'' that is dependen:e, servitors, retainers or anything by which living is earned, for example salary.

PEOGLIARITIES OF NAKSHATRAS	41

   Kritbika Nakshatra :	This is the birth star or Chandra. Many constellations gather at the tail end qf Krithika group.  It
-extends from Mesa 26°-40'. The residuary 10" degree fall in Vrsa. The devata is Agni, Lord (Adhipati) is Mangal and Sukra. Agni is the great purifier, the great consumer and the giver of light, heat and brightness.	Agni causes the fire of life and the drive.	It is also the spark of life. Without fire creation would not exist. Agni is at the base of creation and of the continmtion of existence.	It consumes everything.	The fire of digestion in the human system and the external fire for cooking are only different manifestation of the same principle which is Agni. Agni is the symbol of brightness and brillianc¢, all weapons with fire-power,	And other things of the same category come within the range of Kritbika group.  The fire is considered as purifier; for it burns away all that is sordid, dark and dull, also all that is low and sinful and inauspicious in the world,	The dross thus blazed away, only effulgence and light remain. Fire gives the earth its activity and dynamic and revives it after the spells of cold that periodically inflict comatose condition of the earth.  It is easy enough to deduce from fire the causal effect of the Krithika group.  Mangal is the lord of that part of Krithika which is in Mesa Rasi and Mangal is like a mass of lightning in shining splendour.  So, the Krithika in Mesa is devastatingly brilliant, the effulgence being closely associated with also an incendiary character.
   The Krithika of Yrsa Rasi is brilliant but unlike the Krithika of Mesa, not incendiary. The lord of Vrsa Rasi is Sukra and Sukra stands for worship of beauty and for poetry and imagina­ tion.  He is rediantly white like snow, the 'Kunda' flower and the 'Utpal'. He is also the encyclopedic expounder of all branches of learning.  It follows that the Krithika of Vrsa Rasi is brilliant hut the brilliance does not burn, it is soft and sweet, and benign.  The Krithika of Mesa Rasi is doubtless brilliant, it
-has plenty of heat which burns. The Krithika of Vrsa has on the contrary a softenod radiance, a wave of brightness that d,es nothurt. In Western Astrology Krithika has been described as an incendiary star.
   Rohini Naksbatra: ·The word is derived from "Rohan" which means 'to rise' or 'to bring into existence'. It extends in

42	H!Nf,U SGIENOE OF THE FUTURE
the Vrsa Rasi from l0° degree to 23°-20', The lord of it is Sukra. the symbol a Cart drawn by Cows,	The 'Devata' is Brahma, the prime creator of all things living, from the meanest insect to Man, the beauty of the weird, the paragon of animals. Rohini­ group therefore encompasses everything that comes within the range of creation--beasts, birds, animals etc.  It would also connote the process of growing, begetting, birth, production etc, in brief production, birth and creation.		Rising means process of ascending, that is to say the creative evolution, the cultivation and the improvement.	Mythology describes 'Rohini' the wife of Chandra.  Of all the 27 Stars-all wives of Chandra-Rohini is said to have been fond of fine dress, cosmetics and decore and was the most beloved of Chandra. The Rohini (group) is, in the line with this, considered to be the cause of a taste for fine dress, perfume, and other articles of toilet.  Creation continues to exist mainly on the basis of food ; and Rohini is supposed to be tile cause of food,  The direct and immediate cause of food is Agni and Brahma the remote cause. From this point of view the God who gives food, that is Agni, is the spiritual principle of Rohini (group) Nakshatra and because, Brahma the remote cause of food is also the devata of Rohini; the range of influences of this group runs over the whole gamut of the visible and i11visible animal world.
   Mrlgaslra Naksbatra : Mrigasira Nakshatra extends from after 23°-20' in Vrsa Rasi upto 6°-40' in Mithune. Presiding deity Chandra. Symbol-Antilope or Deer. The word 'Mriga' represents forests, gardens, a search, a seeking to find, to roam about in the forests and a hunter, to seek, to blaze the trail, a guide and preceptor. An erotic affair, beauty of the countenance with particular emphasis on the radiant lustre of the face, because of the Moon. To seek as the primary characteristic of the star, to discover hidden treasures after the churning of the Sea, the 'Samudra Manthan' of the Hindu Mythology, the mother, motherly conduct that is to say maternal instincts, self-sacrifice without hope of requital etc.  Chandra is the lord of the mind, so all mental attitude, good or bad, sympathies and antipathies, patience and impatience, the fidgetiness and placidity, ima­ gination, the gift of poetry, purity, sweetness and light, physical and mental aspects, all these come within this star and when

PECULIARITIES OF NAKS!IATRAS	43
things of sweetness and light of physic as also of the mind, both derivatives from the moon, the horoscope of Rabindra Nath comes to mind. His Janma lagna was Mina with Chandra there and Vrhaspati was in Karkata Rasi. Because of this yoga Rabindra Nath bad something like physical translucence which was object of admiration all the world over, wherever people met. Also, at the same time his poetry enthralled the whole world. The Moon is a sub-planet round the earth and that is why the influence of the Moon on all that happens in the earth is so paramount. And again that is why the influence of the Moon on both the body and mind is simultaneously so very great. Sukra and Chandra both are female grahas ( Planets ) with difference that while tile Moon is the Lord of motherhood, maternal instincts and .oil that, Sukra is the lord of feminine beauty, the structure of feminine form, the physical excellence of women and all that. In the former there is elegance and dignity of the feminine while in the latter, the phy,ical beauty and the lure of feminine form which leads a male captive dominates. The moon is the lord of marine products and of medicines ; that it was from the sea that the moon rose. And it is to the moon that the influences and causalities have to be traced.
   Adra Nakshatra: In Mithune from after 6•·40' to 20'. The presiding deity the Rudra, the wielder of the trident. Symbol-a tear-drop. The lord of Adra is Budha, when the Sun enters Adra the earth is said to be starting its menstrual course, that is "Ambobachi".  Adra means wet or surcharged with water, that is fat. Because the earth is running her menstrual course there are tear drops falling one after another. From Rudra comes all suffering, persecutions and oppressions, anger, ferocity of counte­ nance or hideousness of noise.  Rudra is another name of Siva, the 'Five Faced' {Panchiinana). In knowledge, asceticism, renun­ ciation, as also in enjoyment, he is the supreme consummation of all desires. He is a blue-throated one, the wielder of the most tremendous powers, what could not be attempted far less achieved by other Gods, when the churned Ocean at the time of 'Samudra Manthan' exhaled poison Siva achieved quite simply by holding the exhalation in his throat.  On one side he is the symbol of the most perfect placidity and serenity, on the other hand he is the symbol of all that is terrible.  He holds the great serpent on

·H	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FCTURE

bis bead and on bis forehead crescent Moon with his sweet-soft light. He is at the same time the most peaceful and also the most terrible. And in all these are to be traced the intrinsic characteristics of Adra. Superficially, on the surface of it, Adra stands for suffering, hardness, cruelty, murder, prison, theft, adultery etc. The root characteristic is oppression-in order to purify. All male kidney trouble and connected uretbral disease comes within the jurisdiction of Adra ; so also uterine diseasts of the female.
The skull of Ka!apurusb and hair on it.
   Puoarvasu Nakshatra: Spread from 20° degree Mithune upto 3'-20' Karkata. Presiding deity 'Aditi', the Lord is Budha and Chandra. Symbol-Quiver ( receptacle for arrows),
   The word Punarvasu is derived from Puna+ Vasu, which means return, renewal, restoration or repetition. The 12 Adityas were born of Kasyapa in the womb of Adi ti. The 12 Vasus are Indra, Vishnu, Vaga, Twasta, Barun, Aryama, Pusa., Mitra, Agni, Parjyanya, Vivaswan and Dinakar. The mother Aditi of whom the Gods are born is the repository of everything good-truth, generosity, magnanimity1 purity, aristocracy, beauty and renownt It follows that this start is the cause for these virtues. To start afresh after having once broken off, to stcrt a new life, to come back from a distant land-all these are signified by Punarvasu. It stands for freedom from restriction and limitation, and boundless space. The Gods. the children of Aditi, are pasic1lly and essentiatly are different from children of Diti, who are demons. The demons never had a taste of divine nectar and therefore miss the knowledge of fundamentals, fundamentals of creation and mystery. They were engrossed with or deeply emerged in enjoyment of the externals, the materialistic aspect of the universe. Gold and sex were the two immediate pursuits, which made them extroverts. The Gods however, could rip into the deeper texture of things, they had tasted the divine nectar and become partners in supreme divine bliss and Punarvasu represents all these.
   Posya Naksb_atra: Spread from 3°-20' to 16'-40' Karkata. Lord Chandra. Symbol-Teat of the Cow, the word etymologi­ cally means "to nourish" and that again means to preserve, to protect, replenish, multiply and strengthen.  Everything of the

PECULIARITIES OF NAKSHATRAS	45

very best comes within the scope of this Star. Enjoyment of wealth and prosperity follows from it.
Vrhaspati is described as the  great  teacher  of  all  creation
from amoebae to the Gods and is the source of all knowledge and wisdom. The mystery of creation is no mystery to him. He is the eloquent preceptor, the wise minister, pontifex, head of all religious ceremonies. He takes pleasure in all worshipful ritual. And . that is why the Pusya is composed of these virtues. It bas been described as blossoming and flourishing. It is the mouth of Orien.
Aslesha  Nakshatra:  Spread  from  16°-40'  to 30' degree
Karkata. Chandra is the lord.	It is the	birth star of Ketu. Symbol-coiled up snake. It is the nature of a snake to hide himself, to encircle and entwine, to creep on the chest, to embrace, and to enjoy or unite surreptitiously. All this is an attribute of Aslesba also. The cunningness of the serpent, its devious nature. the burning sensation of poison and pain along with all consequences that poison connotes arc to be read in the constitution of Aslesha.		The virtues and vices of the serpent are all in it. Tile Moon in Asl.esha sicklied over with various faults in great intensity.  Whoever would have his or her Karmapathi ( Lord of the !0th house ) or bhagyapathi [Lord of the 9tll house) in this star would run the risk of having all his or her principal acts in life handicapped, jeopardised or spoiled by many kinds of danger and obstruction.	If the lagna is in this star, the native would possibly be of willy disposition.	Such people would like to work in secret and their words would carry the sting of poison. Magha Naksbatra: Spread from 0° degree to 13'-20' Simha.
Ravi is the lord, the deity 'Pitrigan'. Symbol-The royal Court with a royal throne. Attributes-The virtues and vices of the father's family, wealth, glory, beauty, strength and prowess. lustre and effulgence, superior qualities, sharpness of intellect, nobility.prestige, replenishment, and increase, wisdom, brilli­ ance, capacity and willingness to donate, ancestors on the paternal side-all these are effected by Magha. In no star the position o_f Ravi is so magniflceot and digniflrd. Ravi in "Aswini'' is brilliant no doubt but the brilliancy of incendiary character. It burns everythii1g ab:Jut it. The Sun is then a terrible ball of fire. But in Magha Ravi is like an empercr.

16	HlNDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
confident and self-assured,  If happy and pleased he is in a
mood to make any benediction or gift.
   When Ravi is in Magha Sani gets alarmed and that is natural. For Sani is by character, of a mean disposition, the nature of a sla,e, no wonder that mean and lowly Sani cannot brook the beauty and the dignity of the position of Ravi in Magha, That is why Sani is 'Nicha' and anti-meridional in Aswini and
:,,1eanness and willyness of Sani so much increases. If Sani is the lord of 9th & 10th houses and is placed in the 4th house and associated with Magha he acts adversely the effects of the 4th & 10th houses. Magha is the causes of brighmess and light, Therefore old and gloomy planets cannot stand it. Magha stands for noble impulses and incentives, the gift of Magha must always be a noble one. Magha has been described as glorious one. Anthropomorphically it is the nose of Kalpurush.
   Poorva Falguni Nakshatra:	Spread from 13°-20' to 26°-40' Simha,	Lord	Ravi,		deity	"Shivalinga", Symbol-Swinging hammock.	It is also called the Bhagadaivata Star. All the six majesties, plee.sures and prosperities, love, enjoyment and sensual delights are caused by this Nakshatra.  The origin of creation is the "Shivalinga".	It is the symbol of the call for creation. it announces creation and development. The closure of it means destruction. The individual who in personal life succeeds in mastering the six impulses, that is the impulse of creativity which masters also death. Therefore, on the one hand this star symbo­ lises the joy of creation and enjoyment, and on the other hanil signifies desirelessness and asceticism.	On the one hand it is the gateway to creation, basic seed of it, on the other hand it aims at renunciation, dissolution, and a merger in 'Brahma'.	Fame and renown are the special feature of this star. Poorva Falguni and Uttar Falguni are symbol of good fortune and luck. It is the birth star of Vrhaspati.
Anthropomorphically it is the upper lip of Kalapurush.
    Uttar Falguni Naksbatra : Spread from 26°-40' Sim ha to 10° degree Kanya. The lords are Ravi and Budha, symbol is a bed. Poorva Falguni and Uttar Falguni are pair together. Its attributes are much the same as those of Poorva Falguni. The only difference is that generosity, kindness, patronage and an eagerness to help

PECULIARITIES  OF NAKSHATRAB	4.'I

and succour the distress, to help friends and intimates and those who seek help are more pronounced in this star.
   Hasta Nakshatra : Spread from 10° to 23°-20' Kanya. Deity Sun, Lord Budha, symbol-closed band. The 12 names of the Sun  are:  (I)  Arun,  (2)  Aditya,  (3)  Tapan,  (4)  Divakar,
(5)  Bhaskar, (6)  Bhanu, (7)  Martanda,  (8)  Mihir, (9)  Rmi,
(10) Bivakar, (11)  Sahasramsu and (12) Sura.
   All the attributes of these names etymologically connotes are caused by this star. From the Sun we derive creativity and creation, and from creation we derive light, lui.tre, ar.d· strength. The Sun is the prime cause of dominion, kingship, power of immunity and the light that dispels darkness. Budha is the cause of knowledge. If placed in this Star he sheds light all around. Ravi with this Nakshatra enhances the instinct of dominion and the capacity to rule over others. It brushes up human intelligence, making it more luminous and makes a man vibrant with life and light,
   The symbol is a closed hand or fist. It would fJllow that it signifies determination and clenched resolution. To keep every­ body wi1hin one's grip, the possessive instinct follows from the nature of this star. The magician and the pick-pocket are also born under this star-variation from nobler attributes.
Anthropomorphically it is the band of Kalapurush.
   Chitra Nakshatra: Spread from 23°-20' Kanya to 6°-40' Tula Rasi. The lords are Budba and Sukra, deity Viswakarma, the symbol is the gem on the serpent's crest. Cbitra is very beautiful to look at. Viswakarma, the great artist and artificer to the Gods, the lord of practical arts and applied astbetics. The "knowledge an<i capacity to paint, the gift of narration and well-ordered conversation. From Cbitra is derived the p&inter, specialist in paints, the artist, the musician, the skilful surgeon, the imaginative writer, the specialist in aromatic herbs and dreamer of intricate pa terns. The art of construction, the art of engraving, embroid ry, frame-making and everything that constitutes an artistic complex from fine embroidery to the Tajmabal and on the other hand industrial engineering and skill and the organisation of machinery and plants--everytbir,g is
.:aused or influenced by Chitra.
It is Anthropomorphically the forehead of Kalapurush.

48	HINDU SOIENCE OF THE FUTURE
   Swati Nakshatra : Spread from 6°-40' to 20° Tula. Lord is Sukra, the deity is the Wind and because of this latter factor this causes the attributes of the Wind. Restlessness of disposition or physical restlessness, inability to stay still at any place comes from it; also fidgetiness and no,se. It is self-assured and asserting. The winds \Marut) are the Lords of North-West. The 49 of them under the 'Pa ban', of all Gods he inhe strongest and most obstinate. From these are derived the knowledge, the physical internal adjustments of the 5 Winds,-Pran, Apan. Vyan, Udan and Saman. Also from this comes the storms and the whirl-wind, the concrete disturbance of the atmosphere. A person born under this star is good at buying and selling, his wealth and property come and go quite easily. He is an independent sort of man, always striving for more independence. Asceticism is yet another attribute of this star. Diseases of the wind are to be treated in reference to this. The Wind is the great scavenger, it sweats the dross and purifies. The winowing of rice bears comparison to this.
   Visakha Nakshatra: Spread from 20° degree Tula upto 3°-20· Vrscika Rasi. The lords are Sukra and Mangal, Deity is Satragni. Symbol-a leaf-decked triumphal gate.  Another n,me of this Star is Radha, a compliment to Anuradha, the birth star of the Sua. From this is derived the fulfilment of action, variety of enterprise, achievement irrespective of the means employed and fearless and unscrupulous pursuit of self-interest. The only objective being to reach the end justifying it by any means fair or foul. Real friendship hardly happens.  A man born undei this star works at various things but hardly concentrates on any one of them. To spread about and to dissipate is another attribute of this star.  The native of this star aims at success and is pleased with it when it happens, nothing else matters. Among other attributes may be mentioned obedience to religious. injunctions, quickness on the uptake, and also loss and disaster from enemies, sometimes even death or lunacy.
   Anuradha Nakshatra: Spread from 3"-20' to 16"-40' Vrscika Rasi. Lord is Mangal, Symbol-the same as that of Visakha, Visakha and Anuradha are coo:plimentary to each other. From Anuradha is derived friendship, love, affection aad other tende, feature of a person's character.  From Visakha is considered the

PEOUL!ARITIES OP NA!tSlUTBAB	!19

ultimate objective while from Anuradha is indicated the 'action'. The difference between Yisakha and Anuradha is that while the Visakha-native forgets after success about benefits derived as also the persons who helped, the Anuradha-native retains soft feeling about them, he keeps his friendship intact and does not  forget the benefits. The Anuradha-native's mind is al ways alive and receptive to all feelings and gestures of friendship and love.  He is like the sentinel always a mounting guard over emotions, but lacking the hardness or toughness of the official sentinel.
   Jestha Nakshatra: Spread from 16'-40' uplo 30' degree Vrscika Rasi, Lord is Mangal, the deity is Indra, equivalent to Ravi, the king of the firmament. Indra is the great lord, the mighty w'arrior and a hero among heroes by tradition and in the plenitude of power he reigns supreme. He is the first among courtesans. When this star is unfavourable it causes sorrow and poverty.
   Anthropomorphically Middle Finger and Neck of Kalapurush. Moola Nakshatra :	Spread from O' degree to b • -20' Dhanu Rasi, Lord is Jupiter (Vrhaspati). Symbol-a bunch of roots tied together, deity· 'Nirithi' or 'Alakshmi',	It also moans the 'opposite' or 'rever'se'.	Moola is not one of the good stars which is evident from this that the deity is Alakshmi i.e. God of ill luck. Moola signifies roots, that is to say, everything of basic nature, its motion is finite and limited. It does not go beyond its narrow orbit. Old servant, pedlar of seeds, physician administering herbal seed remedies-every such thing is determined from this star. The Moola native looks into scientific, literary, philosophic and other basic subjects.  Mortgage and Mortgaged property
are governed by this star and its horizon is not rural but urban.
   Poorbasarha Nakshatra : Spread from 1:;°-20' upto 26'-40' Dhanu Rasi.  Lord is Vrhaspati, the deity is 'Barun' (Lord of the Waters), symbol a 'hand fan'. Its attributes are extensiveness like that of the waters. concealment, protection of _the dependant, firmness in danger, kindness, forgiving nature, power of endurance, will to victory, biting time for opportunities for victory, declaration of war, the courage never to submit or yield, travel by water, cold things, marine life, fish or anything concerning fish trade, bridge-making, fisherman's occupation, the watery part of the  human system, the  watery  diseases like



ijr g\J:1.; · 4.i Cl!,se,. kidney trouble, things that float on waters i9-11ludimi;..,b,>ats,.s11ips and om.or veasds, m11t 1.e. bcrges, aUl)lese 1b :l'A!ll<l•W,ithin the purview of tnis Jtar,
"" ,A,l; o.rdi,ng to IIO!lle, tile .doity of 'Poorbasarha' i1 'Daksha' the "1!·r<Qf Pri;japati. He was the father of '.Sati', h• wiia the most p11we,ful, amClng God.s but having incurred the·displ"'!Surc of 'Shival · b.e · was beheaded an<I had a goat's nead .ll!-. p!Jlce ofhi 0001, .,fir;im,:Jh1s 11 is possible to. ascribe attnbutes like truth, desire :in,totb.erqwalilies of Puru, Kuru, Puruuba and otheu to tail;, ar.•.
1,1 JJl,lillr, ]ja,N ksbatn: Spread from 26'-40' Dha11u to 10' degr •pf Makara.  Lord 1s V rnaspati and Saw.  .T.he derivativ
{1;1',111,.. , 1a.ra:;arba are closely  alli"l  to 1nose o f'ooibasarh11,
,R!hcP.OiAtl of difrerence are as follows. PoorbasarhaJpread,&
(r)st,, iqs	COI\cerned with exLCnsivene,s,	Utta.ras111ha. is 1n1ro•
spcctive and pene1rative and is concerned wilh intensiveness, the r11s"i1 ,of ,,the la,uer being more peunanent 1-1>&11 1b,e .for111er (f @ t>Jlsa,rba). Jhe dej1y who pre,;erv,s 11LQ wwl4,an<I..Jllakes fm; jl.$!111 fa.r is ll.ed 'ganadevata', There arc ten gan1ldcva1u Bli1u,, t,Ya, Kratu, Daksha, Kala, Kama, Dhrll• Kuru, Pururaba, Jt,i,6-ab,r,.,,All their auributes are Ill  this stat.  The wari:ior, !,he:,
wtai(lei; ,the, oter,, he1>n1st, the magician, the well-dre ll8lln;,:.tb:e.,happy and aa, cessful men are intluenced b)' t;bis star.
A, 3pecia!.cbancteristic of it is  that  it  cauaea  a person to be
4dmin!d,and,aocially applauded. Another characteristic.of it. is m111 under the intluence of this star the native falls in love with an.rwmartie4 ,girl, Vishma of tne Mahabnarata was one of the 8:Ba ;, so,,under this star one posaessea. self-co11trol, Testraint, endurance,, and firm character. There are special rituab for the w6Tsbip .:,f ganadevatas, which are more or less of specialised tiatllre. The jui e of Soma plant plays a p,ut in 'yagna' and wctship,,	.
. , !! JIii'- Nakshatra:  Spre11d after 10• degree upto 23'-20' in
 kar. l,ord Sani, symbol J fo.otprints, deity Hari who takes alt1 forms of Brahma, Visnnu, Siva, etc, It is Inc birth star of r._wati.  from Ibis is derived light-rays, lion, beasts, horse etc.
'!;Han".means "l.o ta)<e away".  From Sravan is derived  the art
<lt'.Jlearing and education and au<lill'; eoucation. As tbc birlh Jlar of S!ira.swati it eijnili,es and b<!Stowa. Jcho(arahip, educaticn l

PEOULIARil'IE& OF'. N..\.XSHATIIAS1·

proticioncy, DC!speot,for. th1> slilastras,, nowledgo ot . , The emiqent mao,inrth<>,fillld of education and, knowle,ue,., Jhe,.,man who .,is Jilltened,,  r by,, others with respect. is inllu nqed l!y1 tbis SIJ! .  H
<;;µ,J'f'• t}so diseaJe oM e uretl;tr l c .•11n l'.	,,	,,	. , .	. ,ri ,,
 , "Plla11lstha Ji'lakshatra : Spreaf! fr m, ,af c;r);l°•20'. jp,,, M f,M Dpt,o,h'.,41}',, in , Kumbha. Lord Basudai,bata. Y,mhold,rum ill1/2\ 1,P.ta, , B;c_ause .Basudaivata is ,the deity of th/s, star;-;,-it is , i
giver of wealth, precious stone, valuable articles,, gold, oputc;pce etc.  Asthavasu defives fcorn Qanga.  The virtpes, of these. gods
ll,l'll lljljOCiated, with this,star,	Pers,ins , born , \Jn41>r,,!his, ,st;,r, 1are
boatile tg,wom n,. Because, th'y lac!c. adegu!l,te, sex pqwer,,1 f Sanir,J!,h,tbe;l,m!,of,tlle 7t.b )louse arul also \n,t/J:i sta.,-,a,ny ptjlc;r, waaet ill, the 7th house and associated, with th/s, st r , will ,µ&p
do-tbe nii,tive will be,sexµally weak. , ,Ihtas ,If> be noted t)lai
Satllfl\ hlmself i,s eunuch,.  The native of the Star, sel\!(!m marries
or, , macdagllt is. ,pifficult for him, if mar.rice;! cpnjugal relation is
)d,o .h11ppy.	.
A!ltb.ro,po,morphically it is the back f Kalapurush.	,	.	,.
· Sat,a isa Naksh)itra:	Spread  from  after  6°-40'  upto 20·' i
Kumbh .  Lord Sani. Symbol a circle. . .	'  ' ,	·	. . .	.'	.·
The Ocean, rivers, lakes etc. are derived from this st.:r iii!' 'it
.signifies aquatic marine life. It concerns boats, concealment, the nil,and to hi4e beneath the veil, covenng, armour, places to hide things, failures, no-easy success, sorrow, death, restrain, idleness, peevishness, cynicism and a mania for excessive cleanliness,
   Diseases indicated by this star are dropsy, rheumatism and lleart disease.
Purvabbadrapada Nakshatra :  Spread  from after 20· in
Kumbha upto 3'·20' in Mina. Lord Sani and Vrhaspati, deity Ajopada (Rudra}. Symbol double-faced man.
It causes burns, punishes by fire, to cause pain, to burn things
.to ashes, to use words that burn, conduct that blisters, to use Jiarsh words, evil disposition, cruelty, greediness, restlessness, Ce.ling of dispair and unsatisfied  ambition,  to burn by slow
-degrees, sudden excess of anger etc.
Anthropomorphically the side of the body of Kalapurush.
   Uttarbbadrapada Nakshatra: Spread from after 3'-20' upto 16°-40' in Mina. Lord Vrhaspati, deity Ohibridna, symbol the last i.e. funeral bed.

52	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
   The Star is adorned with serpent-like symbol. It looks like ric , jts properties and attributes are like those of Adra, some attributes of Purvabhadrapada also are found. Purvabhadrapada shows signs of contrition and atonement while Uttarbhadrap.da shows restrain. From this are to be calculated long distance journeys, renunciation of ,vordly possessions and mendicancy etc. On the other and knowledge, learning, good counsel, personality
-these also come within the purview of this star.
Anthropomorphically the sole of the feet of Kalapurush.
   Revati Nakshatra: Spread from after 16°-40' upto 30th degree in Mina Rasi. Lord Vrhaspati.		Deity Pusa, Pusa is the keeper of Co1/4S of the Gods, causes Cow keeping and animal husbandry. protection and nourishing of dependants, foster-father etc. Pus& means the cherishing	of	protected	people, nourishment, excellence, increase etc., material enjoyment, wealth, prosperity, su;,erfl.uity, fatness-these are the atuibutes of Revati.  Another attribute is that the native of tllis star advances by leaps and bounds, that it is to say by fits and starts.  Birth Star of Saturn.
   Anthropomorphically cavity	of	the abdomen, groins of Kalapurush.

SIGNIFICATION OF PLANETS

Ravi
   Ravi (The Sun) signifies soul, nature of the native can be judged from Ravi. It represents pomp, powe1·_, position in one's career, dignity, self-reliance, prestigei ego, gravity, i:obriety, nobility, social leadership, highly placed person in any Govern­ mental  Institution,  political power, king or emperor, a middle­ aged man, despotism, hot and pungent taste, chemist, druggist, goldsmith, sacrificial places, coronation chambers, bones, head, brain, courage.  It ·indicates father, Satwa guna, windy and bilious temperament, a male, Kshatriya, day, east direction.
   Disease indicated by Ravi: Any disease due to bad biles, disease of head, brain or bone or esophagus, fever, eye-disease, disease of nerve, arteries, veins, lungs or heart. It also causes disease of mouth or cholera.
Metal:	Gold, Mercury, Ruby.
Colour:  Golden colour, red-copper colour.
Vocation:  Physician, engineer, administrator  in a Govt.
Institution.
Birth star:	Visakha (16) and Anuradha (17).
Digit :	12, 33, 48, 70.
   Strength : Ravi is strnng when he occupies Mesa, Simha or Vrscika Rasi or while full moon is associated with 7, 13, 16 or 17th Stars (Nakshatras).
   A man may possess Satwa guna if Ravi is conjoined with Chandra but there is chance of hi• losing power of thinking due to dark moon (Amabasya). The native may be endowed with real Satwa guna if these two planets are posited opposite to each other. In that case the native becomes truly an energetic person and a lover of independence. While in case of a weak Ravi the native cannot easily be successful in any of his endeavours. Combination of Rav.i and Sani or if they are opposite to each other, or if Sani is combust the native may experience many changes in his career, suffer from various sorts of troubles, meet with unsuccess in life or pass through many vicissitudes in life.

54	HINDU SCIBNCB OF TRB FUTURI!

Chandra (the Moon)
   The Sun is the creator and the Moon is the pr0tector of creation or  it  J;.:u';is i dev'dfop n ' cit 'ctelittd beings.  It is.
repository (reservoir] of life a,;i\1.1\evelops energy, vitality, vigour of life. This is why its rolt is so important and essential in. aice'ria:ining'il child's ioflgivity a d physH:al &treligt!L I ·.'' '  ' '
.	''''lt "iigtiiftes ''mfod, motlier.,	oman, tender feeli 'g,' idvifalllf
11 ct'i1oh, 'potitbness; soi:ialisni, sympathy, kindness, id·e liim,
s6 iai" ortc; h&tteiit physical st.irure, stiired energy;' \tienfat
li'A bin.' s. ineritai slrellgtb, family life, happiness' and• m/seHb's, tUilfu:r'y, peopl('ii:rtislic skill; siik, water, watery things, t'li!nliiii . itJvf fuitttiligd;' i' t. in'ati"ow; stomach, Satwa guna, phlegiiiatie lii ea :•salt;t'. tlvttiiin; nii lgator; milk, manners, psycb:ophysio­ logicat ' <lrl$ idusnes , 'tribi.-;;J and r ligfout ids; fciminbic t\?i1abtHti$s;tailci'eii, rom nces'etc; ·.  .  .	'  '  ,. ·
•"""j'jj li;i',..;: bi;6iise''  i:tie stomach cough nd cold, lunacy, 'iii. Ase '/:if 'th nt:+'e; pllth(sis, colic pain, intestinai disease, kidney disease.	·  ·	· ·  '
 Metal: Concbshell, Silver; Mobnstone. It signifie <:! t6(um. Colour: Whit ncss':.	' ' .• ·.	·' . .	. . .	,J, . "v'ocittttiil :'"d r'k lilp; d aler of silk or fin ma'cbi0:6rica, or
business concernil!ll a,t rr th/Df&,  .	.
Birth star :	l'c,ItliiR 'aliil 'l'lohini. ·
: ti ..i,i( '.

'"  ::1 iht,;H.i;Vuw\JSoi"',iitliln,s.· ,he  iniximu,fitrengt
W!Pdn•Lllft "Jo'ii 0a'iia'J'YfiB 1tto8rl.' '\ire·., assocfated	With	stars
l akshatra,s) No, . 4 5:,.	.	· " '·' ' ,, ' ···· ' '·'· ,"	· '

nJ1•wu-:nhe,nHma,re,0m3o,ioun,1}s1w11ea1"e""11"1'.

"a '''m'''an''s''""o'ti'rh·,,1· c1··art''1o·t' he.


111,

"ilk oelii H;,iJ.i\'r, 'ili's en"eh/y' lif'na 'uta1 ni 1e'1lc'lit'>&d 'i•'de\littatea
'ilU'J1i'HY<: t'c6!1it,·\ficklb'lillna h. Wheti t'iN inlloh .· is ahp ctec't
' for cc\'rlJola'tli'l!11ri it'('sJ'rii)1 ih'b' ii tive' 'becomes 'mobdY,
'l:1'ii'8iiiy'';i'it'" o t i ti riip ,\'m: ii,tatly ·aiia ''a('t!\d 'skin·e tlm lit:
'(liie ii ?i\.e1'iie' o is''mcirose'ind'sorrowrut. "''	'·
. . .	, '•., '.,' ., ,: ',: ! 'I	'  ; /j;; " ';	.1:··.,	':·,,., !	,	(·,
,! ,J.' ' '	,, ,.!•W:"	'··	·Mailgill (Mars}

'' .  :.·• ,  .. _..,.' . ·: -  . . , ' . : '	'

. ''

. '' ,· .	'.i

.': "Self;111p,ertlon, 'darini .and initiative temperament, alettnds.
'i'<eeo intcJTcct, zeal, enthusiasm, prowe·ss, qianliness, struggle f6i	existence,  <io'mbativeness; ·ambition, 'bravery,·  cbutage,
enterprising, energetic, aggressive, passionate, brothers	and

SIGNIPIOATION OP PLANETS

sisters. battle, war, warriort army, commander-i -chief, military operation, strife, litigation, accident, dbstfoacy, rganising capability, an excellent mathematician;' land· 'an:a landed prbperty, ownership of land and house, to build a.1'h&tilie'; llery  tern per, appearance of a bandit or dacoit, pro'pliYirtl!ifc
medicine, earthquake, scars and wounds, wea potis of •oftencli and also defence, blood, cannon, burning gases, irori ·an'd steel; metali or things that grow in ore or under the earth.	· '
  . Mangal signifies intestine, rectum, excretory glancj,, biles. Tamo,guna, bitter taste, a male, Kshatriya, southern direct\q11,.. ;
   DINase: Dysentry, piles, fissure, ulcer in intestinb, typlibid'; cholera, pox, disease due to morbid condition of witld anil' •bile; accident, boils, gangrene due to any kind of wound; ufiniil·· difficulty due to stricture or enlargement of prostare gla't1ii',· •'' ''

Metal :	Iron, lead. Gem: Coral (Prabal) Colour :		Red.

1  /.

   Vocatlo¦ : Army or police officer, engineer; · surgeon; contractor, officer or proprietor of a machinery factoty,"dent'i's't', chemist, metal worker, all vocations connected wtth"•teel'!tnl:! iron industry, handit, executioner, political agitator.  '·•-'' "'
Birth star: Poorbasarha and Uttarasarha.
Digit :  3, IO, 39,
  . Strength: Dark moon when posited in Mesa, Ql,:Vr.scika Rasi, or full moon when associated with Nakshatras ,(St rs): No.• 20 or 21. The native becomes energetic, brave ancl ai;tive..wh n Mangal is situated in Upachaya houses (3, 6, IO & 1.tth..l;, ses from lagna are termed as Upachayas).	; .,, ,
   When Mangal being the owner of malefic houses is · jila't!ed in I(endra position from !agna the native becomes 'o6stinaN, heughty, turbulent.  When the moon is influenced by urifaV61iri
able Mangat the native becomes short-tempered and suffen1l'riii:li loss cf wealth and luck. Favourable Mangal oct'npy'irig' lhird house from lagna makes the native skiiful, coutageoiisi bnt'i, powerful Mangal in that house may be the cause bf pterriafor
death of the native's eld-r brother or sister.	'"'"

66	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
Bndba (Mercury)
   Budha is the herald of the day always preceding the Sun. He is always dancing closely around the Sun sometimes preceding, sometimes trailing him (the Sun). Budba rules the mind-the moral mind-the rational brain, pure reason and ability to think logically. Anatomically he is represented by the cerebrum, the larger part of the brain which may be termed as superior brain.
   The planet Budha signifies education, conscious mind and will. He endowes a person with knowledge that can discern good from evil ; he denotes power of speech, memory, wisdom, intelligence, accountancy, accountant, to copy, to commit to memory, or cramming, orator, public speaker, shrewdne: s, cunning, dexterity, commerce, publishers, advertisement, childishness, printing, printers, go-between, ambassador, merchandising, partnership, broker, mathematics, versatility, lawyer, hawker, journalism, astrologer, export and import, industries, beauty, elegance, wit, humour, psychological development, refined taste, Rajo guna, beta! leaves, nuts and limestone.  He signifies teeth, esophagus,  physical apparatus of breathing, band and mouth, sour taste, temperate disposition, His gender is neuter, and a boy eunuch, convertible, He pertakes the nature of the planet with whom be is conjoined.
Disease:	head in whirl. epilepsy, Joss of memory and  power
of speech, disease of the tongue or mouth, dyspepsia,  The planet
represents carbon and soda.
Colour :  Green like grassblade,
   Vocation: Lawyer, barrister, attorney, astrologer, writer, clerk, journalist, businessman, painter, magician, accountant, auditor, publisher, bookseller, broker, commercial agent.
Birth star:  Sravana and Dhanista.
Digit :  4, 20, 54,
   Strenj!th:  When the full moon is associated with Rohini, Hasla, Sravana or Dhanista Budha becomes strong. Favourable relation between Budha and benefic Chandra makes the native highly meritorious, intelligent and educated. Again beneficial relation among t_he Sun, the Moon and Budha enables the  native to enjoy unstained peace of mind and he (the native) can raise himself beyond the material surrroundings  by  practising  'fapa and Tapas'.  Also  favourable  disposition  bP-tween  these  two

SIGNIFIOATION OF PLANETS	57
planets (Budha and Chandra) endows the native with sharp
'memory.
   A man b,comes a p:,et of extraordinary calibre if strong Budha, Sukra (Venus) and Ravi (The Sun) or the Moon are conjoined together (see Rabindranath's birth chart). Favourable relation among Budha, Vrhaspati (Jupiter) and Sani (Saturn) makes a native a successful astrologer. The native also becomes a successful astrologer when Budha is in a favourable house from lagna (ascendanc) and Sukra occupying the 2nd place in the birth chart is crnltcd in Navamsa Chakra.
   The native is an engineer when in his birth chart Budha having been associated with 'hasta' Nakshatra (Star No. 13) is placed in a Kendra position from lagna.
   Temperamenlllly-beneficial Bud ha indicates activity, agility, energy, intellect, talent, wit. adaptability. When he is unfavourable the native indulges in illegal practices, be becomes a forgercr, thief, burglar, swindler and racketeer.

Vrhaspati (Jupiter)
   Vrhaspati represents truth, wisdom, the knowledge that enables a man to realise God. He signifies intellect, conscien­ tiousness, merit, intuitjon, education, peace, peaceful state of mind, power of speech, Vedas, Vedantas, devotion, morality, religiousness, proficiency in arts and sciences, religious institution, temples, sobriety, philosophic wisdom. oratory, invention, Idealism, fraternity & eq,.,ality, universality, University, one who can attain divine bliss, justice, nobility, belief in divine l)redestination, phlegm, longivity, physical development, the tree full of fruits.
   Vrhaspati is the judge, the noble judge, the wise judge, he is solomon of all ages, pious, philanthropic. Vrbaspati's native
{a Jupitaranian) believes in fraternity and equality, he is sagacious, a friend to all men and beasts alike. He signifies fortune, manliness, reputation, charity.
   The planet denotes digestive organ, liver, breathing dpparatus of the physical body ; he signifies sweet taste, children, father, Brahmin, Northern direction.
Disease :  Diarrhoea, dyspepsia, disease of cough and  cold,

58	HINDU SCIENCE OP t'HB FUTURE
disease of the palate and throat, asthma,• phthis s,. epilepsy, thrombosis.
Colour :  Colour of gold, yellow.
Gem :	En'lerald,·yellow saj'.>phire.
   Vocation: Priest, jurist, judge, ·profession conneeted with Go11ernn1enfal administration, temple, or ,church,- preceptor.
·professor ·in a school or college, philosopher, .preacher of religioU6 doctrines, scientist, engineer etc.
·Birtla star: Poorba and Uttar Falguoi Nakshatra. Digit :	5, 12, 34, 52, 56, 60.
StTengtb: When Vrhaspati is associated with·Posya-Nakshatra
·or when the Sun and the Moon occupy Dhana or Mina Rasi or when full moon is ass1chted with II or 12 Nalcshatra Vrhaspati rcigllins his s1ren·gth.
   The o.Hivii suffers from indigestion or similar chronic diseas1> when Vrhasj'.>3ti occupies the 2nd or 5th place,from lagna due to­ overeating of sweets and meat. Malefic Vrhaspati oceu9ying a Kendra or Kona place from lagna makes the native an egoist, tyrant and he (the native) wants to. rul,e over  his subordinates.
ruthlessly. When the planet is strong and favourable and ia posited irt Kendra or Kona from lagna the native is·bestowed with Very many quali'ties such as high education, '!eartiit13, honesty, morality, intelligence and piety.
Sukra (Venus)
  · Sukra as a general significator holds absolute sway over th!> vast domain of knowledge. This is the only planet that can giive you·acumen and  intelligence of how to utilise-Shastric codes in the practical field of life. For, it knows.the intrigates of.all Shastras. Moreover influence of Sukra over tbe ,adornm.ent of body and-luxuries of life is well-known to all astrologic11l pandits.
• The   planet denotes fashions, perfumes, all artistic ·Qxpressicm,,
,interior-: decorating,  Sukra  is  beauty  personified,  Th  ,p1anot
•ignifies practical knowledge, desire, passion, sexual pleasure. material  prosperity  and comfort, artistic skill, poetic fa.:ult)i,
..music;.musician, actor, feminine grace, lustre in·the• eyes; auihor­ ahip;s' dantingi  learning,  amiability,  kindness,  porsc!01eranoe, vitality, marriage, sexual intercourse, adultery, scandals,·dena, ef ptostitotes,	harems,  pomp  and  grandeur,  infinite .. facuhies,

!GNIJl'I<'lATl<lN' OP PLANR'l'S '	59
1Appl'led·:Sciene<', youn man and· woman, ftower, garment,
machines,  medicines,  aesthetic  :sense, ,'affect-ion-; ,;sen:sUovsneSI,
,IIOttllrmce,, conveyance,: painttng	< ,, : i
'" Jt signifies prostate gland, ov:ary. of a woman, testicle, iienti,ng ·organ, Rajo guna, sour taste;southseastern or eastern· direction.
   Disease: Veneral disease, disease of the uteruil or '<Wary of a woman, diabetes, or disease of kidney, stricture doe to glYtforrhoea
()t·: ayphi!is; or enlargement· ·of prostate gland, ilsthtiu1-0r any tmhct!tllsease due to cough aild cold, phthysis.
,  ,,,·Colour:  White.
' : V'-tlon : Engineer, poet, artist, musician, publicity business; or business of advertisement, actor, physician, busineu; concern­ ing conveyance, jwellery or medicinal products, astrologer.Y
Birth star: Magba. &lgit !	6, 37, 52.
Strength: ·' Sukra is strong  when  the  Sun  and"the ·Moon
-tlccuj,y Vrsa· or Tula· Rasl, or when the full moon is associated witb. either of the Nakshatras (Stars), •iz, Aswini, Aslesha, Magh\l • Jestha, Moofa' or Rebati. Afflicted Sukra by ·association
·\il'ifh•malafies or by occupation in- a11 unfavourable house causes. loo,iiHnorah, ;Aga•in when, Sukra, conjoins with oMrspected by Simi !htjre :jg·,every possibility, . of late marriage or .,marriage dHrteigardillg. -the native'& social customs	or.	eov.ironm,en-t,s.
··Fi'i ndty:aspe" between Sutra and €handra may make the native· 'jU,pilhu•i ambitious; and prominent-in public lire but the native ltla,t<l,;e,sensuous.

Sani (Satur11)
   Old, infi'rm, conservative, animal that is..utlli6ed- as. carriqr Cit' ,hefivy, ,Joads,. lame man, lonely, obstacles, misory,. longivity,, Yama (lord of death), death, selfishness, reality, mendil!llllt, who practises severe austerity dutifu!:.es.. a slow ascent after great
struggle, retarded results, slow '.ec6gnition, slim and sickly cdnstituiion,  buffalo,  horse,  donkey,  goat,  t>ilseed,' 't:oal,
'iil'tiltlcotoared cloth, teeth; borte, tietve-, hair, ·ui!iscle, Torno
'ii\lli:i',"pun'gent taste, imprisonment, 'demora'lisation, "bonda)le, hqfoide: Idiosyncrasies, servant, sofrows, injuries, 'miners,'briek­ t'a ers; thieves, risks, drunkenness, gamblers, seeds'; 'oil; 'ceteals,

fO     HINDU SCIBNCB OF THB FUTURE
woolen fabrics, architectural skill, iron, lead, whirlwind and storms, low people, western direction.
   Disease: Rheumatism, gout, indigestion, chron1c dy!'pcpsia, disease of the gall bladder, rickets, disease due to calcium deficiency, deafness, pthysis, consumption. disease of spleen enlargement, insanity,
Colour :  Black, blue.
Metal :  Iron, lead black sapphire (Nilam).
   Vocation : Mining engineering or engineer, mine owner, coal industry, lead or iron industry, masonry, building and real property, farmer, tannery and leather industry, high officials, business of oil seeds and grains etc,, speculative business etc.
Birth star :	Rebati.
Digit :  7, 39, 49, 56, 72, 82.
Strength:	When the Sun and the  Moon	oocupy	Makar
{capricornus), Kumbha (acquarius) or Tula (Iibra) Rasi or the full inoon is associated with any of the stars, viz. Chitra, Swati, Rebati-Sani is strong.
   Sani signifies obstacles, impediments, and sorrow or miseries, it afflicts the house where it is posited and the native's miseries and sorrows from that house are indicated, A native cannot be a true ascetic unless Sani is strong and favourable. The planet is a gruelling tester of strength and character. It is a blessing in disguise. Sani melts away the dress in man through pain and suffering and by a process of fiery baptism, builds up the native, of course if Sani is favourable. If unfavourable he brands the native with inevitable disaster and doom-even though all other planets might contrive to make him apparently prosperous and successful. He ii wrath of God Narayan or rather sorrow of God, imparted to man, made as He is in His image.
Rahn and Ketu
   Rahu and Kem arc intersection points of lhe Sun's path. and the Moon's, the Nodes. Physically non-existent, in motion they are very· much there, directly exercise their influence which is an intensive and also far reaching as the influence of any other planet.  It is well observed and ascertained fact that

SIGNll!'lOATION OF PLANET•	61
the influences of Rahu and Ketu are direct and positive in character, making and unmaking yogas.
   The Epics relate that when the divine nector came out of the charred primeval ocean, Rahu stole a sip of it and acquired immortality. So, he survived even when Vishnu cut off his head. Thus Rahu is tbe Drngon's head and Ketu the Dragon's tail, both immortal, that is to say, effective, There is a mythical story to explain tbe active nodal points.
   The myth explains aiso other essential features to be consi­ dered because Ranu is an Asurha (demon), his pass,on, lust and greed are consequential. A subtle point about it is that as Rahu has no actual material body, the passion, the greed and the lust are endless and ins,liable. Nothing can slake the thirst that Rahu gives the native-i[ he is powerful in the horoscope. It follows from this that insatiable desire causes intense heart burnmg, sorrow and pain, and to satisfy desire the native would stop at nothing ; the strong Rahu would sweep away virtue and vice alike if it stands in the way. He would not bat any eyelid to do anything that is likely to advance his cause, truth polite­ ness, civility included. A powerful Rahu and propitious would give the native great wealth.
   It is an attribute of Rahu to enhance or aggravate the characteristics and properties of the houses which it occupies or aspects. If favourable, the result is better than what would have been without Rahu's and if unfavourable worse-
   lle ause the nodal points move clockwise, Rahu and Kctu are described as having reverse motion. And some scholars equate this with Purba-Janma. And philosophically this suems to be quite justifiable. If the seven planets, minus Rahu and Ketu­ andtheir placing in a horoscope represent their astronomical positions at the  point-instant  of birth.  And if, as the Hindu p 1losophy believes, the current birth is just one of an astro­ nomical number of births and rebirths, just an urge out of innumerable urges connected like leads on threa.; of garland by Samsker-experience. It is quite logical that thore should be some planetary force to carry on or perpetuate the continuity,
   Disease: Indigestion, disease due to accumulated gas or wind. in stomach or intestine.
Colour ;  Rough black_

62	HINDU SCIBNCB OF TIIE FUTURE

Metal : ; Lead.
Gem:  Garnet (Gomed).	,, ,
· Vucatlon : · Any  kind of' itinerant job, it gives >the, poof11r1ion
of the plallet with which it i& associated or aspected by.
Bir,th star : .Bharani.
Di.git, :  8', 41, 42.
   Strength: ,During SJ!ar or lunar eclipse or when, .the fulli moon is associated with Bharani Nakshatra or if Chandra, occupies Mithune Rasi Rahu is strong,

   The symbol of Ketu is Serpent.	Subtlety and, sec y,, indolence and all the inferior aspects of a man's nature are caused or determined by Ketu, One thing however is	important,; Because Ketu is a part of Ralrn, 'Yet not a part of it but the otbQt: side to it, it represents asceticism. And if aspected by beneficial• planet it goes to the farthest length of it by giving the nath,e(of course if well-placed particularly in the 12th house) ultim.ate self-realisation.

!\
, N11ture and characteristics. , of Planets (commonly t qned as
Karakata) described by other eminent Astrologen. ,
   I. Ravi (Sun) : Through Ravi one ought to ascertain; a, person's copper, gold, father, ownself, prowess, courage, Mrvico under King  or  Government, glory,  prosperity, vocation, prole ssionat pursuit, acuteness and enthusiasm.
He is Kshatriya by caste.
   2. Chandra (Moon): From Chandra one ought to determlt1e' the weltare of the mother, 'mind, mental tranquillity, sea:'bath;' white cho.-,ri, moonstone, umbrella, good fan, fruits, tenderness,; fame, flowers, corn, agriculture, acquisition of pearls, b:11-nietal;' sil vcr, swoe1 substances, milk, water, cows, good meals, bodily'
health and beauty.
Ho is Vaisya.
   3. Mangal (M,rs): Mangal represents strength, en .11.gy, valour, daring  act, odium, battle, brothers & sisters, accident,

BlGNlF'lOATION 01" l'LANll,:S	6S
litigat;on,,sin,'l>iles, fissure, uttering falsehP<>d, cruelty, products derived  from  the earth, landed	property, house, activ,eness,
.qliarreJ; feud, ki0:dred.	.	.
.Mangal 's caste is Kshatriya,
 ' 4.  'Biadli11 (Mercury): Budha is the planet that influences one's learning, eloquence,  skill  in fine arts, eulogy from th11 l rned; maternal uncle, dexterity in speech, cleverness in religious meditation and the like, aptness for acquiring know leclge, intelligence, truth spcaking, skill in mechanical arts,
religious rite relating to Vishnu, sacrifice, one's sister's aona or daughters,  .	.	'
. .	13y aste Budha is Sudra.
!,	',.'	' .
 . . S. Yrhaspati (Jupiter) : Vrhaspati represents knowledge, wisdom, good qualities, teaching, magnanimity, learning, medt, knowl ;ge of Vedas, Shastras and Smritie11. reverence to ods ll,\I_\I,, r-l'hmin11._penan e, religious faith, trcasure,house, conqll\'St o(, 1onscs,. honour, prestige, personality, compassion, childrc 4lll.iswr,,, acquisilion of knowledge of self-realisation, wealth apd, atppi,ncaf,
He is Brahmin by caste.
·· 6. S11l!ra (Venus):  One should  know the following fro111
Sukra,, .iiz. wealth, ii andeur,  prosperity, beautitude, pleasuie
iJ1 etry, learning that gives materiaJ success, triple symphony (union of.song, dance and instrumental music), acting, beautiful eye·s, : v hicles, clothes, ornaments, boarded goods, happiness,
41(:e ts, /iowers, couch, sport, ministersliip, cl\arming speech, wife, l!l&rriag and f tivity, house, sexual  intercourse,.,'addiction (o
many women and lasciviousness. H _is also Brahmin by caste.

   1,. Sanl (Satum) : Sani is an indicator of one's longivity, death,', :ear, degradation, misery, humiliation, poverty, sickness, reproach, sin, impurity,  misfortune,  resorting to low people,
.dro..;siriess, debts, iron, servitude; labourer, agricultural ii e nts, jail and capHvhy.	·	· ·
Sa'li is a leader of outcasts.

64	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE

STRUCTURE AND TEMPERAMENT OF PLANETS
   Ravi: R:1vl is of hili1us temperament. He is strong in bones in the hody.	He possesses a dark-red form and has limited quantity of  hair, his eyes are of reddis, brown colour, he has a square-bllilt boJy, is v1liant and wrathful and has massive arms. Chandra:  Clnndra has a huge bo,Jy, is both young and old, Iern and whits, has fine lovely eyes, black and thin hair. She governs blood. She has	beautiful complexion, wea,·s a white garmon:.	She has wiild and phlegm in composition and is mild
in temr r:! ment.
   Mangat:  M,ngal has a slender waist, curled and shining hair. He hris fit rce eyes, he is bilious and cruel in kmperament and is of reddish hue. Ho is wrathful but exceedingly generous. He has a youthful appearance, governs marrow in the body and wears a red garment.
   Budha : His complexion is green as the blade of 'durva' or panic grass. His body is full of veins, he has red and long eyes and is clad in green; he governs the skin, is  fond  of fun and possesses. even ei es. He is pleasant in his speech and is a mixture of throe humours-Vala (wind), Pittha (bile) and Kapha (Phlegm).
   Vrhaspati:	He has a body of yellowish hue ( colour of gold). His eyes and hair are brown. He pc,ssesses a fatty body, with elevated chest and big bolly.	He is phlegmatic in temperament and is exceedingly intelligent.	His voice is s,milar to that of a lion or the sound of the conch.  Ho is always after wealth.
   Sukra: Sukra has black curled hair and very lovely broad eyes. His limbs and body are huge. He has much wind and phlegm in his composition. His comple ion is of the colour of Durva Sprout. He has treasured his virile power.
   Sani: H, is dark in form, lame and bas wind in his composition. He has got deep eyes, a lean and tall body full of arteries and veins.  He is idle and is exceedingly calumniating. He is cruel and  has  no pity.  He is dull-headed.  He has got large nails, teeth. stiff hair, and limbs. He is dirty and is of sinful disposition.  He is fierce and is a personification of anger. He is ripe with old age and wears a black garment.  He governs. the muscle in the body.

ABODES OF PLANETS
   Rnl: Ravi generally moves in all open area whcN there is light. He lives in a temple of Siva and in a place where there is no water. Ravi signifies Eastern Quarter.
   Chandra : Chandra lives in a place where there is Goddess Parvati, the place is occupied by women, full of water, herb and plant and the spot is also full of honey or liquor.
Chandra indicates North-West Quarter.
   Mangal: Mangal lives in places where there are thieves or low people, the place is one where there is fire, it is a battlefield too.
Mangal indicates Southern direction.
   Bndha : Budha moves in places where there arc learned men. His place of choice is the spot where God Vishnu is kept. He likes an assembly, a recreation ground and a mathematical hall. Budha indicates Northern direction.
   Vrhaspati: His places of liking are Treasury, the Aswatha (Peepul) tree, or the dwelling places of Gods and Brahmins'; Vrhaspati signifies North-Eastern direction.	''
   Sukra : His a bode is courtesan's quarter, the harem, dancing hall, bed room. He indicates South-Eastern direction.
   Sani: He lives in places where there are only low alld outcast people, his liking is dirty places and his house ii dilapidated leaf-thatched hut, Direction is Western Quarter.

Speciftcation of Influences of Planets on different Bhavas (hoos.,s)

Ravi	governs Chandra governs Mangal   governs
Budha   governs

Vrhaspati governs Sukra	governs
Sani	governs
s

10th bhava, vocation, profcsaion. Mind, 4th bhava, mother.
3rd bhava, brothers & sisters.
2nd ( power of speech, eloquence ), 4th (Education & Learning) & 6th bhava (Kins). 2nd, 5th, 9th & 11th bhavas.
4th & 7th bhavas.
3rd & 8th bhavas (longivity)

A few important Planets, their various moods
& derivative influences.
   The various moods of the planets vis-a-vis the different houses arc most important for all astrological purposes. Basically howe,er it will be perceived that from a realistic point of view they a" also essential to the setting up of an integrated mathematical structure, twelve houses which arc by no means natnral, but altogether man-made on the basis of exhaustive observation, set off against nine planets, are the coping-stones of the mathematical edifice, It is now further complicated, with the aid of further researched observation by the introduction of the working hypothesis of planetary moods.
The fundamental symbolism are as follows:-
   Ravi the sun is taken as a symb-ol of Atma {the soul); the Moon of the mind, Mangat (Mars) of energy, Budha (Mercury) of
.nimbleness of wit and intelligence, Vrhaspati (Jupiter) of learn­ ing and wisdom, Sukra (Venus) of material plenitude, Sani (Saturn) of sorrow and effort, Rahu and Ketu because of their vacuum they symbolize e>:erything that all the houses primarily stand for.  In these categories, the subtleties and variations arc
.numerous.
   Ravi • The Sun is the lord of the Solar system. The Hindu sacred books refer to him as the "Lord of the Earth" and a creator, reserver and destroyer. So, if the Sun is good and strong in a horoscope, posited in any of the 3rd, 6th, 10th or 11th houses or aspects the 10th, the house of Karma, it follows that the native will be favoured by the king and would be
.eminent. At least he would occupy a high position in life. If however the Sun is joined or aspected by Saturn it causes a lot of impediment in native's rise-his favourable disposition in relation to other benefics is to some extent adversely effected. If the Sun is badly positioned-the 6th, 8th & 12th houses arc considered to be bad houseS-his rise is obstructed. The Sun is also the symbol of father and if he is placed in the 6th the relatives on the father's side cause the native considerable annoyance and pain.
   The Sun also stands for vitality, if favourable he increases, ifbad  diminishes  it.  Curiously  enough  the Sun, who is the

ABODES OF PLANETS	67
brightest, most effulgent visible God in the Hindu pantheon, the lord of the earth and the symbol of the soul has been classed as a papa (natural malefic) graha (planet), It can be explained only on the hypothesis that the Sun is also responsible for the final destruction of the Earth at the time of "Maha-pralaya" (the great Dissolution) when the Sun operates through 12 replicas of himself.  Not a very convincing explanation but the only one that occurs to us.
   The Sun as also the Moon are particularly concerned with infants' danger to life-Indian Astrological term is A-ristha or Bala-ristha yoga. Infants' longivity be cut short if they are badly posited.
   Chandra (The Moon) : The Moon is said to represent the mind and this has bearings on also such aspect of Hindu mythology as lie outside astrology proper. To take just one example :-One name of Shiva is 'Chandra-churha', the moon being on his brow. The implication is, Shiva, the ultimate summit, rises higher than the mind to a point which the mind approaches but cannot reach. In other words, the sublimation of the mind and to get beyond it-that isthefullest realisatior..
   In astrology it represents also the Mother, if in conjunction with malefic Rahu or Sani, the mind is considered to be afflicted and is seldom at peace. The disturbance in poise pursues the native in his social life. The moon is the cause of emotional exaltation or depression as the case may be. A favourable moon tends to make a man an idealist. A too favourable moon is again like too much of a good thing, it would rob a man of all practical or pragmatic virt1,es. He would lose himself into a morass of emotion.  Such a moon might enhance a native's religiosity. If Vrhaspati and Sani are in favourable conjunction with or are related to Moon and V rhaspati in his own house which is Kendra or Kona the religiosity is bound to be there. The importance of the moon in calculating an infantile danger (Aristha) is as great as that of Ravi.
   Mangal (Mars): The general among the planets, bestower of all military virtues and toughness. Incendiary in character, antipodal to Sani (Saturn) in attitude and methods but complimentary  to Sani in various ways in working out the

68	HINDU SOIENOE OF THE FUTURE
pattern of life. While Sani is freezing Mangal is fiery. While Sani is slowest moving of all planets (name 'Sanaischara' makes it self-evident) Mangal is very CJUick. He upsets all careful slow going human calculations. While the Sani is normally the planet of poverty, slothfulness, Man gal is generally a planet of
;,rocess, valour and niches and also a planet of wealth (if favourably disposed). While Mangat lives in a Fort of Castle, Sani lives in leaf-thatched hut, while Saturn is symbolised as a very old man Mangal is symbolised by youth. In the 2nd or 9th house Mangal is the cause of sorrow being extremely unfavourable. Bad luck and poverty invariably follow. If Man gal is debilitated in a Kendra the results are good. In Makar (Capricorn), Mesa (Aries) and Vrscika (Scorpio) Mangal give; rise and promotion if any of those houses is the 10th or any other 'Upachayasthan', as already said Mangal in the 2nd or the 9th, spoils luck but if it is Mangal's exalted position or own house this does not happen, Mangal in the 3rd house generally kills off the elder brother or sister.

CHAPTER-III
WHAT IS LAGNA?

   Every Almanac (Panjika) carries a t ble of lagnaman and lagnas as a discord. It varies slightly in detail from year to year and place to place. The lagnaman is extremely important in determining the lagna. The word 'lagnaman' roughly interpreted, means calculation as to which Rasi stays how long to eastern side of the horizon. The calculation reaches upto 'pala' and 'bipala' and is noted against each Rasi. Because the basis of calculation for Almanac is not in each case the same, each Almanac shows slightly different or variant lagnaman. We setforth below the method for determining the lagna according to two Almanacs then current in 1360 Bengali year namely 'Jagatjyoti' and 'Susiddhanta'. It will be seen that they are different in respect of the lagnamiin for all the most important places in India, necessarily due to different latitude and longitude.

The Method of Calculation of Lagoa and Lagnasphuta.
   Let us take the case of a boy born at 10 A.M. (Local Time) iu Calcutta, Thursday the 17th Baisakh of the Bengali Year 1360. English corresponding date is 30th April, 1953. Now how to find out the lagna ?
   The first thing is to find out the Lagnamiin for Calcutta. Then we should find out from the Almanac the exact hour and minute for sunrise on the 17th Baisakh (if the birth is at night) the exact hour and minute for sunset). Then we have to look up how many dandas (ghaties) and how many palas after lagnamiin starts did the sunrise occur. The Susiddhanta Panjika notes the following lagnamiin of different Rasis::
RastDandaPalaBipalaMesa41010Vrsa45425Mithuna53232Karkata53933
70	HINDU SOIENOE OF THE FUTURE

RasiDandaPalaBipalaSimha52835Kanya52522Tula53458Vrscika53937Dhanu514JOMakara42843Kumbha35415Mina34720   Now how long after the sunrise the Jatak (Native) was born is to be noted, if the birth was at night then how long ,after the sunset.
The sunrise on that date was 5 hrs. 8 min. 43 sec. (I. S. T)
+ 24 min. (according to Indian Ephemeris 23 min. 30 secs.)= 5 hrs. 32 min. 43 sec. (The boy was born at 10 A. M.-Local Time) The boy was born 4 hrs. 27 min. 17 secs. after sunrise. Reduced danda, pala etc. it  works out  11 danda 8 pala 12 bipala 30 anupala.  This is called Jata-danda or Isthadanda.
   The lagnamiin for Mesa Rasi is 4 danda 10 pala 10 bipala. 2 danda 9 pala 32 bipala has to be subtracted as consumed (Bhukti) by Ravi at sunrise and then it has to be seen what Rasi specifically the Isthadanda comes. The same would work out like this.
Mesa Man	Danda	4-10-10
Ravi bhukti	-2-9-32

Vrsa Man

2-0-38
+4-54-25
6-55-3

Mithuna Man	..	+5-32-32 12-27-35
   Isthadanda is 11-8-12-30. Mithuna Rasi-Miin terminates at Danda 12-21-35 bipala. Isthadanda is included in it. Hence lagna falls in Mithuna Rasi. It has to be learnt how to examine the placing and positions of the various planets (grahas) in the natal chart (Rasichakra). Susiddhanta Panjika shows the positions of all the planets for each day on the margin to the left. Where the planets were on that morning at 6 A. M. is shown:

GRAHASPHUTA	u

Ravi-0-16-9-30Vrhaspati-1-4-34-11Chandra-6-25-56-32Sukra-11-22-9-58Mangal-1-5-56-14Sani-5-29-34-2Budha-11.z3.5.:oRahu-9-14-33-58Ketu-3-14-33-58   Tbe position of planets reckoned by Amsa, Kala etc. is called grahasphuta and how does it show the exact position?
  The Sun is recorded at 0-16-9-37 bikalas. It means that Ravi having traversed Mina Rasi is now in Mesa Rasi which is O Rasi and its precise position in Mesa Rasi is 16 degree 9' Kala (Mim•te) 37 bikala (second). The Moon having passed 6 Rasis is in the 7th-that is in Tula Rasi, the exact point 25° amsa (degree) 56' Kala (Minute) 32 bikala ( second ). This is the grahasphuta for 6-24 A. M. (Calcutta Local Time i.e. 6 A, M. Indian Standard Time or I. S. T). The boy was born at 10 A. M. (Calcutta Local Time). The grahasphuta for this time has to be found out.

How to find out the grahaspbuta (or Degree of Planets):
   Each Almanac (Panjika) gives a variant version of the grahasphuta. In the present case we depend on the Susiddhanta Panjika. So, it is necessary to find out right at the start what precise time the grahasphuta is indicated for. Nearly, but not all the Almanacs start with the grahasphuta for sunrise. So, the first step is to see how long before or after this the child is born. It is easy enough to know from the Almanacs the grahasphuta for the whole day-that is 24 hours. The grahasphuta for how long has a!so to be worked out. It is easy after this to work out the grahasphutas for Isthadanda or for hours and minutes adding to or subtracting from the grahasphuta in the Almanac, the grahasphuta that is worked out for the birth time is found. One particular point is that the Rahu­ sphuta decreases and always in the nature of things, it .has to be subtracted from grahasphuta in the Almanac. If the birth takes place before the grahasphuta ir. the Almanac, it has to to be added, of course. Add 6 Rasis to the grahasphuta you get Ketu's sphuta. When a graha is in retrograde motion then the sphuta has to be found as we did in the case of Rahn.

72	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
   Now, as an illustration the grahasphuta of IO A. M. of the 17th Baisakh has to be found. The Almanac gives the graha­ sphuta for 6-24 A. M. (Calcutta Local Time). The child was born 3 hrs. 36 minutes after sunrise.

Ravisphuta on the 18th Baisakh
"	,,	,,  ,,	17th,,

0-17"-/'-50"
O-l6°-9'-3i"

Ravisphuta for 24 hours	0-0°-58'-D"
   3 hrs. 36 min.=216 min., 24 hrs.= 14-iO min. Now, by Rnle of Three we have to find out Ravisphuta for 216 min.  That is:--
1440 min.;  216 min. :  58 kala :  X (13 kala is omitted)
216 x 58	= 8 kala 42 bikala
1440
Therefore Ravisphuta for birth time :	0-16°-9'-37''
+	0-h'-42"
0-16°-18'-19"

Because, Sani  is	retrograde,	we
calculation of Sanispbuta.
On the 17th Baisakh Sanisphuta
On the 18th	,,	,.
   Sanisphuta for 24 hours Now, by Rule of Three:

show	the	method  of

5-29°-34'- 2."
s.29•.29'-45"
o·. 4'-17"

1440 min:  216 min:  4' kala 17" bikala ( =257 bikala):  X
X:	216 x 257	=about 39 bikala
----r:f4o-
This is to be subtracted from the Sanisphuta of the 17th
Baisalcb.  That is:	5-29°-3+'.,."
(-)	O'-W'
5-29"-33'-2:111
   The word 'R' is to be written against 'Sani'. "R" mei}ns retrograde.
Lagn&sl)huta
   We have seen that on the day of birth Mithuna Lagna lasted till 12 danda 27 pala and 35 bipala. Mithuna Lagoa started from after 6 danda 55 pala 3 bipala. The native's Jathadanda (or Jsthadanda) is 11 danda 8 pala 12 bipala 30 anupala.  The child
was born at 4 danda 13 pala 9 bipala 30 anupala after Mithuna Lagnaman started. This may be put differently, we may say that after Mithuna has been used up for 4 danda 13 pala 9 bipala

BHAVASPHUTA	73
and 30 anupala the boy was born. And it has to be worked out how many 'Amsa' (degree) and Kala (minute) of Mithuna it covered. You have to remember, each Rasi consists of 30 degrees and it takes 5 danda 32 pala and 82 bipala to cover 30 degrees of Mithuna Rasi. By the Rule of Three you are to find out the used up extent of Mithuna at the time of birth.
5 danda 32 pala 32 bipala = 19952 bipala
4 danda 13 p1la 9 bipala = 15190 bipala (9 bipala 30 anupa!a
is taken as 10 bipala )
So, by Rule of Three 19952:  15190  :  30 amsa  :  X
15190 x 30  =22 amsa (degree) 50 Kala (min.)
19952
   That is after Mithuna Rasi used up exactly at 22 degree 50 minute the boy was born. This is called Lagnasph uta. It is indicated in English as Ase. (Ascendant) 22'-50'. It should be noted down in the natal chart by the side of the Lagoa or Ascendant.
   There are other ways of finding out the Lagnasphuta. Tbe Table of Ascendant, so called, is now readily available in market; audit shows the calculation of Lagnasphuta and Dasamasphuta. Any learner can take advantage of this snd work out the lagna and dasamasphuta without any other aid. Shri Nirmal Chandra Lahiri's 'Table of Ascendant' is the best help in this line.

Bhavasphuta
The Zodiacal chart is, as has been said above, divided into
12 equal parts. There are also 12 bbavas ( this is more or less a technical astrological expression), that donot always coincide with the Rasi. A single Rasi may be covered by more than one bhava or a single bhava may cover one whole Rasi and overflow into another, we shall examine the 12 bhavas in detail later on. They make up the Jata-Chakra ( or birth­ chart) and life of the native. The reason why each bhava does not al ways cover 30 degrees may be said in brief as follows.
   Unlike the Rasis the bhavas do not cover exactly 30 degrees each. The reason for this, briefly stated, is that though the Zodiac is divisible into twelve 'Rasis' of equal length, the bhavo­ chakra (sphere) has to be calculated from the point of the !agna ;

74	HINDU SCIBNCE OP THB FUTURE
so, the 'Rasi-chakra' and the 'bhava-chakra' overlap and donot coincide. The lagna-point may fall anywhere on the earth planet; so, in relation to the 'Rasi-chakra' some bhava may be bigger than the 'Rasi', some smaller. In the first place the 'Rasi­ chakra' is ecliptical. And in the second the lagna-point would be on that part of the arc, which is the eastern horizon and fill equal parts of the arc from east to west, above, and fill equal parts of the arc, below would make up the Zodiac. But even though it may be possible in theory to cut up the sky like this, the 'Rasi-chakra' would not in fact admit of being divided into twelve exactly equal parts. It is an instance of theory not precisely coinciding with, but slightly diverging. In fact the exact coincidence of theory with fact would happen only if the arc passed meridionally over all places on earth. Really speaking however, only those places which fall on the equator have the arc of the 'Rasi-chakra' actually bisecting the sky.
   The 'bhavasphuta' bas to be determined after lagnasphuta and 'dasamasphuta' ( Tenth bhavasphuta ) are worked out. If the 'tenth lagnamiin' is known then of course, 'bhavasphuta' can be found out. But since it is difficult for the beginner I have explained how the 'tenth sphuta' has to be worked out according to the Table of Ascendant.
   We have seen that the boy mentioned iUustratively was born at 10 A. M. on the 30th April, 1953.
  Let us follow Table of Ascendant by Shri Nirmal Chandra Lahiri.
In table No. I in the Column of 30th April at 12 noon, we find
2 hrs. 30 min. 59 sec,
In	"	"  II in 1953 correction to different years...  + 38 sec.
2 hrs. 3I min. 37 sec.
In table No. III correction for different localities ( birth place is Calcutta,
therefore for Calcutta ).	-	4	"
2 hrs. 31 min. 33 sec.
"	"	No. IV corrected time Minus	2-h-rs-.  -0-m-in-.  2-0-se-c.
This is called Sidereai Time	O hr.	31 min. 13 sec.
   Why	we subtract 2 hrs. 0 min. 20 secs. need further explanation.  If you look into the Table I of the  Table of

Bl!A VASP:S:UTA	75
Ascendant you will see that Sidereal Time at 12 hr. Noon Local Mean Time for any of the places of the world is given in Table No. I. The boy was born at 10 A. M. Local Meantime-Calcuttu. This means he was born 2 hrs. before 12 Noon, You will find in the Table of Ascendant correction to increase the time interval. In this case time interval is 2 hrs, for 2 hours 'increase' would be 20 secs. Hence we have to add 20 secs. to 2 hours i.e. 2 hrs. 0 min. 20 secs.
   Because the boy was born 2 hours ht.fore 12 Noon, we have to subtract 2 hrs. 20 sec. from the Sidereal Time for 12 Noon.
Now at 10 A. M. on that day
Sidereal hrs. etc. are Ohr. 31 min. 13 sec.
Now the Ascendant Table (or Lagna Sarani) for Calcutta shows.
For O hr.  32 min. lagna falls at 2 Rasi - 23 amsa - 29 kala
''	0 hr. 28 min.	11	2	"	- 22	"	- 37  ''
Difference of Lagnasphu:a for 4 min. = 52 kala
   We are required to find out Lagnasphuta for Ohr. 31 min. 13 sec. ( Kala ).  In other words we have to add sphuta of 3 min.
13 sec. to the Lagnasphuta of Ohr. 28 min.	Now, by Rule of Three, 4 min.: 3 min. 13 secs.: 52 secs. : X
I.e. for 3 min. 39 secs.  and  for 13 secs. we find 3 secs.
i.e. 39 secs.+ 3 secs=42 secs.
Therefore	2 Rasi 22 amsa 37 kala or sec.
+42 	"
2 Rasi 23' -  19'
Ayanamsa correction
for 1953=	minus (-)  13'
2 Ra!ti-23° - o'
   We shall speak about 'Sidereal Time' later; for the present let us confine ourselves to the working out of the tenth 'sphuta' ( dasamasphuta ). We have seen that Sidereal Time of 10 A. M. ( Calcutta Local Time ) is Ohr. 31 min. 13 sec. Sidereal Time is necessary to work out dasamasphuta. In Table of Ascendant look at the table of Tenth house.
At Sid. Time... 0 hr. 32 m. = 11 Rasi 15 degree 45 sec. (kala) 0 hr. 28 m.= 11 Rasi 14 degree 37 sec. (kala)
Difference of sphuta

for 4 minutes
i.e. in I minute

I degree 6 sec.
approx. 16 sec. ( kala )

76	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
   We are to find out sphuta for 3 m. 13 sec. This means 48 sec. for 3 min. and 3 sec. for J 3 sec. equal to 51 kala or s c. Add to the sphuta for Ohr. 28 min. which is ( 11 Rasi 14 degree 37 kala
+51 kala) 11 Rasi 15 deg. 28 kala.
Ayanamsa correction for 1953 = minus 13 kala.
So, 11 Rasi 15' amsa 28' kala minus 13' kala=ll Rasi 15' amsa I 5' kala = dasamasph!!ta.
   All the bhavasphutas may be determined, if the lagnasphuta acd dasamasphuta are known. We would state this in the form of a formula.
(Lagnasphuta - dasamasphuta) + 6 = A.
Dasamasphuta +A= Dasamasandhi. Dasamasandhi +A= I Ith bhavasphuta.
!Ith bhavasphuta+A=:Jlth bhavasandhi.
!Ith bbavasandhi +A= 12th bhavasphuta. 12th bbavasr,huta +A= 12th bbavasandhi. 12th bhavasandhi +A= !st bhavasphuta.
   The last count is not necessary, for we know it already. This mly be counted only to see whether lagnasphuta found here coincides with the correct lagnasphuta.
(4th Bhavasphuta -  Lagnasphuta) + 6=B.
Lagnasphuta + B= Lagnasandhi. Lagnasandhi + B=2nd Bbavasphuta.
2nd Bhavasphuta + B=2nd Bbavasandhi. 2nd Bhavasandhi+ B=3rd Bhavasphuta. 3rd Bhavasphuta+ B=3rd Bhavasandhi. 3rd Bhavasandhi + B=4th Bhavasphuta.
   Now, adding 6 Rasis to these bhavaspbutas we shail get all the twelve bhavasphutas and S1ndhis. Let us work out these twelve bhavas and arrange them one after another.
  {Rasi means 'Sign'. Hereafter we shall put 'S' to indicate Rasi• Degree for 'Amsa'. 'Min' for Kala).
Lagnasphuta	2,-2•:, - 6'
Minus 10th sphuta	l1!-15'-15'
-3-7'-51' +6
=16'-18'-30"
Now, 10th sphuta	I l•-15'-!5'
+ 16'-18'-30"
10th bhavasanhdi	0•-l'-33'-30"

HOW 10 TEST CORRECTNESS OF LAONA	77
+ 16°-18'-3!{
11th  bhavasphuta	0-17'-52'-0"
+ )6'-18'-3(/'
11th bhavasandhi	1-4 -10'-3<,'-
+ 16°- 8'-3(./'
12th bhavasphuta	1-20"-29'-0"
+ !6°-18'-31,"
12th bhavasphuta	2-0°-47'-30"
+ )6'-)8'-31!"
Lagnasphuta	2-2.>0-6' -0"
How to test correctness of Lagna
   The rising sign (the word 'Sign' is English equivalent of Ra,i) is the lagna Rasi w!,ich is termed as lagna and English equi­ valent is Ascendant. We have already described the method of erecting a birthchart vis-a-vis Lagna but to determine the Ascendant we must depend on birth data which may not be correctly quoted due to various reasons. So, it is quite reason­ able for an astrologer to test the correctness of lagna-pcsition in the birth chart before he makes any forecast about the native. There are more than one such method to test the correctness of lagna, which will be stated in the following paragraphs. According to Maharshi Parasar no lagna is to be taken as correct until and unless the lagna is tested by 'Pranpad' methGd. We however give below the general methods first; in most cases these methods are sufficient for beginners to find the correct lagna. Subsequently 'Pranpad' and 'Gulik' or 'Mandi' will be taken up.
   I. According to 'Sasthidas', an astrologer of remote days, Jagna may fall there where Chandra is situated or from the position of Chandra lagna may fall in the :th or 9th house, or 5th or 9th house from the position of Chandra-lord (i.e. the lord of the Rasi where Chandra is placed).
But our experience is that this method is successful in 50
percent cases ; so, it is not dependable.
2. r method:-
   (a) If a person is born within the first half of the day calculate 7th Nakshatra from the Nakshatra associated with Ravi. Lagoa will fall in the Rasi indicated by that Nakshatra. Please remember, each Rasi consists of 23/4 Nakshatras.  Let us

78	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
t 1ke an example. Say Ravi is associated with 24th Nakshatra i.e.Satavisha. From Satavisha 7th Nakshatra is Krithika (No. 3 Nakshatra). So, lagna will be either in Mesa or in Vrsa.
   (b) If a person is born in the second half of the day calculate from Ravi's Nakshatra the 12th Nakshatra.  The Rasi indicated by the Nakshatra will be his lagna Rasi. From Satavisha the l!tb. Nakshatra is Pusya wb.ich indicates Karkata Rasi. So, lagna falls in Karkata Rasi.
   [c)  If a person is born within the first half of tb.e night Rasi
indicated by 17th Nakshatra from Ravi's Nakshatra will be the lagna Rasi.
[d)  If a person is born after midnigb.t or we may say second
half of the night lagna-Rasi will fall in 24th Nakshatra from the Nakshatra of Ravi. 24th Nakshatra from Satavisha is Purba­ s.uha [No. 20 Nakshatra) which indicates Dhanu Rasi. This holds good in my case. I was born at 2 A. M. that is after midnight, Ravi in my chart is associated with Satavisha and my 1agna falls in Dhanu.
There  is  difference  of  opinion  among  some  eminent
asrrologers on some p·Jints.  They are as follows:
   (i) If a person is born after midday within the sunset from Ravi's constellation count 12 Nakshatra and you will find lagna Rasi.
(ii}  If a person is born  within  midnight  Rasi indicated  by
19th Nakshatra and after midnight 24th Nakshatra from the constellation associated with Ravi will be the Jagna.
   In more than 60% cases these rules are quite helpful. Moreover, there are other difficulties too. We know, there are som Nakshatras whic 1 fall in two Rasis. In such cases true Lagna Rasi cannot be found out.
3. r method:-
   Add the number of R1si where Rahu is posited, number of lagna Rasi and numb"r of Ravi {Ravi's number is always l} the total obtained by addition of three digits is to he divided by 7. If the remainder indicates even number it is the chart of a Female, if the  remainder is odd number a male child is
indicated.
Take for example-Rahn is in Simha Rasi which is No. 5
Rasi in the Zodiac, Ravi is I and lagna being in Dhanu lagna Rasi is 9, The grand total is 15 to be divided by 7 and remainder

now TO TEST OORRECTNESS OF LAONA	79
is I which is odd number.  Therefore it is the birth-chart of a male.
4. r method :-
   (i) When a person's lagna falls in fiery or windy Rasi the person is seldom fat.
(ii) While a person's lagna falls in earthly or watery Rasi
the native may be fat and bulky, Vrhrspati, Sukra and Chandra are watery planets. If any one of these planets is associated with Jagna the native may be fatty. Aspects of different planets on lagna or Chandra or on both give different results, such as :-
   (a) If lagna or Chandra receives the aspect of Rahu the native may be lean and dry-looking and texture of his skin is dry having no glamour at all.
   (b) If Mangat aspects lagna or Chandra (particularly lagna) tlle native may be well-built, strong and stout.
   (c) If it is Sukra, he has large beautiful eyes, curling hair and graceful e.ppearance, and he is affable and phlegmatic.
   (d) If it is Sani aspecting lagna or Chandra or he is posited .in lagna or is associated with Chandra the native is lean and thin, he will be hungry looking with deep eyes with no fat in his body.
   (e) Ravi indicates strong physique, if he aspects or conjoins with lagna the native will have strong physique, bald head, his gait will be dignified and he will be sober.
  (f) If Chandra aspects lagna or is associated with it the n1tive may have sublime look, soft body, he may be a beautiful· man to look at with curling hairs and large round eyes.
   (g) If Budha aspects lagna or _is conjoined with it the complexion of the native may be green like durba grass and he will have medium height.
   This is to be noted that every Rasi has different peculiarities, The planetary aspect on or association with lagna or Chandra may give different complexion, structure, and countenance as said above, and on scrutiny and by applying one's common sense he can adjust his reading and ascertain the true lagna­ Rasi.
5. m Drekkana one can determine the sex of the native.



Rasi

Mesa do Vrsa do
Mithune

Determination of Sex from Drekkana
1st Drekkana. 2nd Drekkana. 3rd Drekkana.	Sex
Male Female
,.	X	,.	X
X	X	X
X	,.	,.	X
"	X	X	X	"
"	"

do	..	X

X	X	..

Karkata	"	X

"	"	X

do	X	"

X	X	"

Simha

,.	"

X	"	X

do	X	X	"	X	..
do	X	X	"	X	..


*Tula do

..	"	X	..	X
X	X	X


do	X	X

..	X	..

Dhanu	,.	X

..	"	X

do	X	"	X	X	..
Makara	..	X	"	..	X

do	X
Kumba	X	"

X	X	.".

do Mina

.".	X

....	.".	X

do	X	..	X	X	"
• If a person born in the 3rd drekkana of Tula Rasi is a male
child he  will be an  expert in artillery and shall possess a
large face.
   Drekkana means one-third of a Rasi. Each drekkana is equal to 10 degree, e.g. , If the lagna is 8 degree in Dhanu, the person is born in the !st drekkana of Dhanu Rasi. So, the native is a male.
This method also does not give us the sure result.  So, we
cannot rely on it absolutely.
   There are other ways of testing the correctness of lagna. These methods are general no doubt but experienced astrologers

HOW TO TEST CORRECTNESS OF LAONA	81

depend on these methods in majority cases of doubtful lagna when some of tb.e rules described earlier donot agree with the true lagna position. Even when methods previously mentioned do agree with the actual lagna position they apply these methods (to b written in the following lines) to become doubly sure about the correctness of lagna.
   To explain further-For argument's sake let us say that a few methods de<cribed before have been applied strictly and we are sure about correctness of the lagna. Even then an experienced astrologer  may apply the following methods to be more certain about the position of lagna.
The nature of test is as follows:-
   (i) From Navamsa of lagna or Lagnadhipathi (Lord of lagna) counlenance, complexion, nature of a native can be determined. A man's nature, complexion, countenance may be influenced by the planets aspccting lagna or lagnapathi. These points were discussed earlier to a greu length.
Some Astrologors take recourse to the following methods and
verift the ex:act position of lagna, viz.•
   (ii) If the 3rd house from lagna is occupied by Sani, Mangal, Rahu or Ketu tb.e younger brother or sister as the case may be, may not live long ( i.e. there is possibility of their early death ).
   (iii) If the lord of lagna is in conjunction with malefic planets or the lagna·lord is aspected by inauspicious planets, or the lagna-lord is hemned in between malcfics or if tbat lord
-Occupies any dusthan ( 6th, 8th or -12th place) the native may not be keeping good health. But this is to bo remembered that without ·being aspected by or being in conjunction with any malefic if the lord of lagna occupies the 6th place from lagna tile native shall be keeping perfectly good health.
   (iv) If the lagna or lagnadhipathi (Lagoa-lord) is not associated with or aspected by any benefic the native's road to prosperity is not free from thorns.
   (v) When lagna, lagnapathi or Chandra is aspected by all the planets the native shines extraordinarily in almost all spheres of life materially or spiritually.
   Mahapravu Shri Chaitanya Dev's horoscope shows	this brilliant yoga.
(vi) When the lord of lagna is weak and at the same time be
6

82	HINDU SCIENCE OF l'llE FUTURE
is aspected by Sani the native may have to pass through many vicissitudes of life and he may sustain monetary loss due to wrath of the king of the country or through the activities fo thieves.
   It is needless to add that different houses ( Rasis) or bhavas indicate different parts of the body,  If the lord of dusthan aspects or conjoins with certain bhava or house ( Rasi) the native may suffer from diseases pertaining to that part of the body indicated by that bhava or Rasi. This unfavourable results may happen during tb.e dasa-antardasa of those malefic planets.


What is Golik and Pranpada Lagoa ?

(Another name of Gulik is Mandi, we may use any one of this term)
   I. The span of the day ( whicb. is termed as Diva-Mao and it is found in every Alamanac ) is divided by 8. Each part is ruled by a planet. Thus the part which is ruied by Sani is called Gulik or Mandi. The lord of the date is the first lord of the 1st part, 2nd part to be ruled by the planet next to the 1st lord, 3rd part to be ruled by the planet next to the 2nd lord and by this manner the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th lords will rule over each part or division of Diva-man and Sani will certainly be lord of a part and that will be Golik.
   2. In case of birth at night the span of night is to be divided by 8. Each part is ruled by a planet and the part ruled by Sani is Gulik. The mode of determining lord of different parts is as follows:
   The first part is ruled by the 5th planet from the lord of the date of birth, That is, if the birth date is Sunday the first lord is to be ruled by the fifth planet from Ravi i.e. Vrhaspathi, 2nd lord will follow  Vrhaspathi, i.e. Sukra, 3rd lord is Sani etc.
   We have drawn two charts showing the lords of different parts of the day and also night,

Golik Chakra-at day time.

Date.		Isl	 2nd	3rd		4th		5th	6th 7th	8th part.	part.	 part.	part.	part. part. part. part.
Sunday  Ravi  Chandra Mangal Budha Vrhas. Sukra Sani X
MondayChandraMangalBudhaVrhas.SukraSaniXXTuesdayMangalBudhaVrhas,SukraSaniXXXWednes.BudbaVrhas.SukraSaniXXXXThursdayVrhas.SukraSaniXXXXXFridaySukraSaniXXXXXXSaturdaySaniXXXXXXX


Golik Chakra-at night time.

Date	!st	2nd	 3rd	 4th	5th 6th 7th	8th part.	 part.	part.	part.  part. part. part. part
SundayVrhas.SukraSaniXXXXXMondaySukraSaniXXXXXXTuesdaySaniXXXXXXXWednes. Ravi Chandra Mangal Budha Vrbas. Sukra Sani X Thurs. Chandra Mangal Budha Vrbas. Sukra Sani X  X Friday Mangal Budha Vrhas. Sukra Sani X		X X Saturday  Budha  Vrbas. Sukra  Sani  X	X		X    X
   Let us.explain the two charts and find out the Gulik time and lagna.
For instance-
1. The span of the day is 32 danda or ghati when divided by
.'!, each part is equivalent to 4 danda or ghati, the 1st  part will
·be ruled by Sun the lord of the date Sunday ( as the birth date is Sunday ), 2nd part be8ins from after 4 danda upto 8 danda, the lord is Chandra, the 3rd part begins from after 8 danda upto 12 danda, the lord is Mangal and so on. Thus we get 28th danda which is Gulik time, because that part is ruled by Sani. Now we have to convert 28 danda into hour and minute and calculate lagnasphuta which will be Gulik lagnasphuta.

84	HINDU SCIENCE OP !rRE PU:rtJ'l\E
   2. If the birth is at night the span of the night will be 21t danda ( span of the day is 32 danda, hence span of the night is 28 danda ). If it is divided by 8, each part is equal to 3 danda 30, palas. The first part will be ruled by Vrhaspathi. Because in case of birth at night 5th planet from the lord of the birth date will be the lord of the first part and the 2nd lord will follow the ist lord. That is, first lord is Vrhaspathi, 2nd lord i1 Sukra and 3rd lord is Sani. Add these three parts and you will find 10 danda. 30 palas. This is Gulik time. Convert this time into hour and minute and find out lagna for that hour and minute, which will be Gulik lagna.
One thing is to  be  noted  that Gulik danda will have to.
be converted into hour and minute according to sunrise or sunset of the birth day of the native.

Testing correctness of Lagoa from Golik or Mandi
   Now if the lord of the Rasi where Gulik lagna i1 placed ia. powerful the 5th or 9th house from Gulik lagna-Ra1i will be the native's lagna.  Again from Navamsa Rasi from Gulikamsa l i.e. Gulik lagnasphuta ) the 5th, 9th or 7th Rasi may be the native's lagna-Rasi.
   Gulik lagna is necessary to judge a horoscope on othe, important matters also.

PRANPADA
   Convert the birth hours and minutes into danda and pala, we generally call them Jata•danda or lsthadanda. See tho method of erecting a birth chart and of working out a lagna. Now, thia. Jata-danda and Pala are to be converted into Rasi and. Amsa.
15 Pala= I Pran I Danda =4 Pran l Pala=2 Amsa
I Pran or 15 Pala=30 Amsa, i.e. 1 Rasi.
The native's Jata-danda and Pala is to be converted into Pran.
(i.e. Rasi) and Amsa.
   Let us test the lagna of a birth chart which was drawn already in Chapter I, Let  us  again  quote  the positions of lagna and

PRANPADA	85

'Ravi:  Lagnasphuta is 2 Rasi 23 Amsa 6 Kala (may be written as 2•-23•-6' ), Ravisphuta is O Rasi 16 Amsa 18 Kala (bikala is omitted) in other words Ravi is in Mesa Rasi, 16 degree 18 minutes.
Now these points are to be considered first, viz. :-
   (i) If Ravi is in Sthira (Fixed) Rasi, 9th Chara Rasi from Ravi's actual position should be imagined as Ravi's
;position.
   (ii) If Ravi is posited in Dwatyaka Rasi (dual Rasi) the 5th 'Chara Rasi is to be taken as Ravi's position.
   (Iii) If Ravi is in Chara Rasi no change in his position is necessary. We have already worked out from Jata-danda-Pala the Rasi and Amsa. With this Rasi and amsa add to newly found Ravi's (his degree & minute to remain as it is, only Rasi will be changed if necessary) degree etc. This new Rasi and amsa is the Pranpada lagna. If Pranpada lagna and Amsa-kala (or degree & minute) are similar to actual lagnasphuta we should
·say lagna Rasi and Amsa found out from birth hours and minutes are correct. If not we shall have to experiment the process of 'Pranpada by changing the Jata-danda and Pala till we get the correct lagna & amsa etc.
We may ex.amine our previously drawn  birth chart as quoted
above. The boy was born on the 30th April, 1953 at 10 A. M. Calcutta Local Time, corresponding Bengali date is 17th Baisakh, 1360 B. S. Thursday. Jata-danda Pala is 11 danda 8 Pala 12 bipala.
Now  the  process  of c nversion  of  Jata-danda-Pala to
Pranpada lagna is as follows :-
1 danda	4 Pran
11   ,,	44 Pran
44 Pran ... 44 Rasi which means 36 Rasis already consumed, only 8 Rasis remain. Hence, we take only 8 Rasi.
I Pala	2 Amsa
8  ,,	16  ,,
I bipala	2 Kala
12  ,,	24  ,,
So, it comes to 8 Rasi.16 amsa 24 Kala.

86	HINDU SCIENCE OF TIIE FUTURE
   Ravi is posited in Chara Rasi in the birth chart, therefore Ravi's position should remain unchanged.
Next step:-	 8Rasi 16 amsa	24 kala And Ravi' sphuta	O .,	16 ,.	 18 .,

Total



9 Rasi	2 amsa  42 ka!a.
This is Pranpada lagua.

   Original lagna worked out is 2,.23•·6'. This does not tally with the Pranpada lagna worked out on the basis of Jata-danda­ pala quoted already (i.e. 11 danda 8 pala 12 bipala).
   We have to change the Jata-danda & Pala with an eye to make it exactly at par with Pranpada lagna, then we shall be able to correct the lagna and sphuta vis-a-vis birth hours and minutes very very correctly. Students should experiment the process of change of Jata-danda & Pala and shall gain experience to find out the exact birth time and correct lagna. However, we have to rectify the error in Jata-danda-pala in this case.
If we change the present Jata-danda & Pala (11 danda 8 Pala
12 bipala) into 11 danda 3 Pala 24 bipala we get 8 Rasi 6 amsa 48
kala (by converting the newly imagined danda-Pala etc. into Pran & amsa).

So,
\tavisphuta
Total

8 Rasi  6 amsa	48 kala &
0  ,.	16  ,,	18  ,,

8 Rasi 23 amsa	6 kala

This is Pranpada lagna.
   This tallies with the lagnasphuta found in the birth chart of that boy born on the 30th April, 1953. There is another point to be looked into. The lagna position in relation to Pranpada lagna should be at a distance of 5th, 7th or 9th house (This is to be measured from Rasi to Rasi from the true lagna,)
   Now here Pranpada lagna falls in Dhanu and Lagna in the birth chart is in Mithuna i.e. they are at a distance of 7 Rasis from each other.
   So, the correct lagna is found according to Pranpada system. Now, convert Ii danda 3 Pala 24 bipala into hours, minutes & seconds. It will be 9 hrs. 57 m. 35 sec. ( Calcutta Local Time). This means there is a difference of 2 min. 25 secs. in quoting the exact birth time which error is possible no doubt.

ARUDHA CHAKRA OR BHAVAPADA
   If the lord of any bhava or Mood in a horoscope is at a distance from the house the same distance calculated anti-clock­ wise from the position of that lord is the Arudhapada of that bhava. Take for instance, the lagna which is the house of physical health, reputation etc. is in Vrsa (Tauras) .and Sukra, the lord of Vrsa Rasi is in Tula (Libra). This puts Sukra, the lord of the house of self (physical health and reputation etc.) six houses removed from the lagna. So Lagnarudha-sthan (or Lagnapada) would be 6 houses calculated from Tula (Libra); Then lagnapada falls in Mina Rasi.
   The indication of Arudha-sthan from the points of view of all the twelve bhavas-(1) health, (2) wealth, (3) effort, (4) happi­ ness etc., is set forth in Parasari Hora but Uttar Kalamrita gave only 8 Arudha-sthanas. The Arudha Chakra based on this kind of calculation he!)" assessment or apprisal of the value of a horoscope. There are also many ways of assessing or evaluating a horoscope, but this is one of the mos, significant. Various other things also can be determined from the calculation about Arudha-Chakra ; they will be dealt with as far as possible in due course later.

   If the Arudha-Chalcra is drawn fully and completely it will be seen that some house has two or three padas, some are empty but if the lord of a mood (bhava) is placed in its own house then that pada will fall in the house of his own. For instance when lagna rises in Dhanu and Vrhaspathi is in Mina, the Sukhapada will fall in Mina rasi and again if Vrhaspathi in the birth chart is in Kanya (Virgo) the Sukhapada in this case also will fall in Mina (Pisces) Rasi,

88	HINDU SOIENCl!i OP THE ll'UTURE
   We have drawn in the previous page a birth chart and at the same time an Arudha-Chakra. These chakras will give clear idea of the method of erecting an Arudha Chakra.
   In this manner all the padas are to be determined. We have seen that there are lagnapada, dhanapada, sukhapada etc. Maharshi Parasar narrated the results arising out of these padas according to the aspect of Subha (favourable) and Asubha (unfavourable) planets and their positions.  lfpadas are afflicted due to aspects (dristhi or conjunction) of any malefic planets that pada which it represents also is afflicted.  Again, the pada for that bhaba may not bestow favourable result on the native if the lord of that pada (that is the ruler of the house where a pada is placed) is not otherwise strong. For instanc lagnapathi Vrhaspathi is in Mesa and therefore lagnapada falls in Simha rasi where there is Rahu and in Kumbha rasi there are Ravi, Sani, Budha and Ketu. Under this cifcumstance lagnapada is associated with a natural malefic Rahu and aspected by two malefics viz. Sani and Budha. The lord of lagnapada (Ravi aspects the lagnapada) is not very favourably disposed as he is in conj unction with his dire enemy Sani and is aspected by Rahu who is also inimical to Ravi. Ravi's aspect on lagnapada is technically said to be favourable but as he is afflicted his aspect on lagnapada will be of little help to the native in respect of maintaining good health.· Vrhaspathi, the lord of lagna in the natal chart aspects lagnapada as also lagna. This is slightly be,tter. The result will b,e that the native though not of perfectly good health shall be able to maintain mediocre health due to the aspect of Vrhaspathi but in malefic dasa-antardasa he shall suffer  from Yarious ailments. Actually the native suffered heavily during Vrhaspathi's dasa and Rahu's antardasa and also during Sani's dasa. Budha also did not let him free from suffering during malefic antardasa as Budha is a maraka both from lagna of the natal chart and lagnapada.
   We may judge the educational career of the native. Look at the Arudha Chakra and you will find Sukhapada is placed in Vna Rasi, the Rasi-lord Sukra is exalted. Generally educational career is determined from 4th, 5th and 10th bhava and bhava lords. Besides Vrhaspathi, Sukra and Budha are natural aignificators of education.

OBNEllAL llULES TO JUDGE AN AllUDHA CHAKRA	89

   In the present Arudha chart Putrapada and Karmapada along with Sukhapada are to be looked into. We must know the position of these padas. We have already seen that Sukhapada is not very much aft1icted by any malefic planet though it is aspected by Mangat who is the lord of the 5th bhava in the natal chart. Putrapada is in Mesa Rasi associated with Vrhaspathi, a natural benefactor and significator of education. This is favourable no doubt but this pada has become ominous due to aspect of Sani, Rahu and the 8th lord Chandra. Of course to go deep into the aspects of educational career of the native other favourable points should not be overlooked, viz., Chandra though weak and lord of the 8th house in the natal chart is in Vrhaspathi's constellation and Sani is associated with 5th lord Mangal's constellation. Over and above Sukra the lord of the Rasi where Chandra and Mangal are posited is placed in his house of exaltation and is in Kendra from lagna. The Karmapada falls in Karkata, its lord Chandra will give n,i xed result due to conjunction of the 5th lord Mangal who is Chandra's friend. These two planets are aspected by natural benefic Vrhaspathi.
   Maharshi Parasar is of opinion that if the Kendra & Kon a positions (particularly Kendra position) from a Pada are occupied by any benefic, favourable result of that pada may be predicted.
   This is the method how padas are deten:1ined and result good or bad acrued thereby is to be judged.

General Rules to judge an Arudha Chakra.
1. If lagnapada is placed in an auspicious house or  the  lord
-of the Rasi where the Arudha Pada is situated is favourable, or associated with beneficial planet or planets and, at the same time that lord of the Rasi (where Pada is placed} is strong and
-occupies Kendra or Kona house from the Pada the native prospers in life and earns name and fame. But if the lord of that sign where the pada is placed is a natural malefic and occupies the Kendra or Kona position from the pada the native will get unfavourable result iu respect of that Arndha Pada.
2. If the 11th place from lagnapada is aspected by auspicious
·planet  the  native  becomes  popular, lucky and is a perfect

90	HINDU SOIENOE OF THE FUTURE

gentleman. He earns money through a respectable profession and believes in God.
(a) If the lagnapada is aspected by inauspicious planet he
earns money through dishonest means, at the same time if the lagnapada receives the aspect of both auspicious and inauspicious planets he earns money through both honest and dishonest means.
3. If a planet aspects. the 11th house from lagnapada and he
has no aspect on the 12th place from the Lagnapada such a yoga according to Maharshi Parasar is very brilliant dhana-yoga. Let me cite an example.


  Lagnapada falls in Kanya (Virgo) and the !Ith place from lagnapada is Karkata aspected by powerful Sani who has no, aspect on the 12th place from lagnapada.
   Maharshi Parasar says that aspect of some planets on the !Ith· place from lagnapada will also be effective and if the aspecting planets are powerful the result will be more productive. He further says that the position of planet or planets on that 11th place from lagnapada will be an additional force to give sure result through this yoga. This yoga is termed as ..Disthya Yoga".
   4. Aspect of auspicious and inauspicious planets on the 12th place from the lagnapada 11ives the following results, viz.,
  (i) If that 12th place is aspected by Ravi, Sukra and Rah11 the native shall have to spend money due to some act against king or administrative authority. These results may be more effective if Sukra is aspected by Chandra.
   (ii) If Budha in conjunction with and aspccted by a favourable planet is posited in that 12th place (from Lagnapada) the native

GENERAL RULES TO JUDGE AN ARUDHA CHAKRA	91
shall have to spend money for his own kinsmen.  And if Budba is aspected by and  conjoined with malefic planets he  may be the cause of monetary loss for litigation or quarrel with some one.
   (iii) If Vrhaspathi is posited in the 12th place from lagnapada and is aspected by any other planet the native may have to spend money to pay off Government tax etc.
   (jv) If Sani is there in that 12th place from Lagnapada the native may have to spend money for his brother,
   5. If Rahu or Ketu occupies the Rasi (Sign) where Lagna­ pada is placed) or these planets are posited in the 7th place from Lagnapada the native may suffer from some sort of pain in the stomach or intestine. Ketu's position in those two places is more effective and unfavourable.
   6. If the lagnapada or the 7th place from that pada is aspected by Ketu being in conjunction with or aspected by a malefic planet the native will be brave, grey haired and tall.
   7. If the lagnapada or the 7th place from lagnapada is associated with Chandra, Vrhaspathi and Sukra the native will certainly be a lucky man. The result will be more and more prominent if one, two or more of them are there i.e. if there is Chandra the result is favourable, if it is Chandra and Vrhaspathi it will be more favourable and if the three planets are there the result will be very favourable.
   8. If the lagnapada or the 7th place from that pada is occupied by any planet, be it naturally favourable or unfavour­ able, the native will be lucky and a notable personality provided that house (or sign) is planet's house of exaltation.
   9. The same result shall occur if the 2nd place from lagnapada is occupied by an exalted planet.
   10, If the 2nd place from lagnapada is occupied by Budha the native becomes a King (now-a-days there is hardly any king anywhere, so it should be construed that the native shall hold an eminent position in the society).
  (i) If Vrbaspathi is posited in the 2nd place from lagnapada the native shall be omnipotent.
   (ii) If it is Sukra in that 2nd place the native shall be a poet and an orator.

92	HINDU SOIBNOE OF THE F'OTORB
   11. If the following places are occupied by a powerful planet or planets the native becomes famous and lucky, Yiz.,
i) Kendra or Kona from Lagnapada,
ii) Lagnapada itself,
iii) Jiiyiipada and,
iv) Ayiipada,
   The yoga will be effective if all these places are occupied by powerful planets. If the 6th, 8th and 12th places from lagna­ pada are occupied by strong malefics the result will be very unfavourable.
   12. If the 2nd, 6th or 8th place from Lagnapada is occupied by malefic planet and those places are aspected by malefics the native may be a thief. If there are also auspicious planets in those places or those places are aspected by auspicious planets the result will not be unfavourable.
l Generally we call those people thieves who steal things by
breaking the lock and key or enter stealthily in a house and steal away things and money, but t:uly speaking the definition of theft should not be limited to that. Those who collect money by dishonest means may be classified in that category of thieves. ]
   13. If the 7th place and other Kendra or Kona or Upachaya­ sthan (3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th place) from lagnapada is occupied by a powerful planet the native enjoys happy conjugal life.
   (a) Again if the 5th place from lagnapada, Kendra or Kona houses or Upachayasthanas are occupied by powerful planets affinity between the father and son may be expected.
   There is another version-if from the 7th place Kendra or Upachayasthanas are occupied by powerful planet happy conjugal life will be the result. If these planets or a planet is naturally benefic and strong the more favourable result will be evident.
   14. If lagnapada and jayapada are in Kendra or Kona p9sitions from each other or they are in 3rd and 11th place from each other this is considered to be a 'Rajayoga'.
  15. In the birth charts of father and son if their Lagnapadas happen to be in Kendra from each others the true affinity between the father and the son is possible.

SHAYANADIBHAVA	93
   If their lagnapadas happen to he in Kona from each othe, the result will be neutral and lagnapada.s of both of them are in dusthanas (6th, 8th. or 12th.) from each other, the relation between the father and son may remain strained.
   16. If the 2nd and 8th places from lagnapada are occupied by equal numher of planets it is a sign of poverty. Similarly if the 2nd and 8th places from atmakarakamsa laana are occupied by equal number of planets this also is a sigll of poverty.


SHAYANADIBHAVA
There are 12 Shayanadi Bhavas, namely
1. Shayana
2. Upaveshana
3. Netrapani
4. Prakashana
5. Gamana
6. Agamana or Gamanechha
7. Saviibiisa or Savii.baaati
8. Agama
,.	Bhojana
10. Nrityalipaa
11. Kautuka
12. Nidra
   These twelve names are symbolic terms to explain the results or planets being in any of these twelve bhavas. Thia ia alao. to be noted that the Shayanadi bhavas of all	the 9 planets including Ketu are to be calculated. The process of calculation is more or less mechanical but the results deduced from the bhava	or 'Abaatha' are claimed by authoritative books oil astrology, to be very effective. Maharshi Parasar went to the length of warning his readers that it must be seen whether a certain planet gives favourable result in Shayanadi Bhava. If that planet is unfavourable the planet is expected to impart some sort of unfavourable result. So, in determining the strengtll and well disposition of a planet Shayanadi bhava is an important factor for consideration.

94	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
Calculation of Shayaoadi Bhaba :
   1st Step : Planet's Number (i.e. Ravi I, Chandra 2, Mangal 3, Budha 4 etc.) to be multiplied by number of Naki;hatra with which that planet is attached. (Nakshatra's Number meaning Aswini I, Bhavani 2, Krithika 3 etc.). The results obtained after multiplication of these two figures are again to be multi­ plied by the number ofNavamsa the planet enjoyed [ Say Ravi in Vrsa 20 degree 3 min. His first Navamsa house is Makar and actual position in Navamsa chart is Karkata. So, number of Ravi's Navamsabhukti is 7 ].•
   Let us write this by way of a Mathematical Formula, viz. (Planet's Number)x(Plt's Nakshatra) x (Pit's Number of Navamsa bhukli).
2nd Step :  i.e. The  next  step :  Number  of  Lagoa-Rasi,
Janma Nakshatra (i.e. the Number of Nakshatra attached with Chandra in Natal Chart) and Istha danda (or Jata-danda), these three figures areto be added together. The total thus obtained is to be added with the figure obtained in the first step (If lsthadanda happens to be IO danda I Pala it will be taken as 11 and not 10).
   3rd Step :  The total figure thus obtained (after addition of the above figures) is to be divided by 12, the remainder will show the Shayanadi bhava of the planet. In other words, if the remainder is I. it is Shayana bhava, if it is 2, it is Upaveshana bhava, if it is 3 it is netrapani bhava etc.
   After the calculation of Shayanadi bhava of planets, their capability to give definite result, medium result or no result at all is to be examined.
   We have seen that after division by 12 of the sum total of figures obtained after addition of the digits in the 1st and 2nd step there is a remainder which is termed as "Shesanka" i.e.
·residue digit. This 'Shesanka' digit is to be multiplied by the same digit (i.e. if Shesanka digit is 6, it is to be multiplied by 6, in other words square of Shesanka digit) and the resultant figure is to be added to "Swaranka" reckoned below, and the total figure is to be divided by 12 and the remainder is to be added to
Planetary "Dhrubanka" shown hereafter.
·
" Some	astrologers are of opinion	that instead	of the
planet's navamsa bhukti planet's amsa-kala is to be taken, say Ravi in Vrsa 20°-3'. So the ams.a that is to be taken is 21.

SHAYANADIBHAVA	95
This digit thus found is to be divided by 3. Now, if the
;remainder is I, it is "Drist:"	which means little result.
,,	is 2, ,, ,, "Chesta''  which in.cans maximum result.
,,	is O, ,, ,, "Bichesta" which means no result.
   Our readers are definitely tired after following these cumbrous process, if they go deep into the processing and practise it they will find it very easy. To help them we are elaborately treating this matter in the following paragraph.
   Here we shall take birthchart, jata-danda etc. of the boy who was born on the 30th April, 1953 at IO A.M. Calcutta Local Time corresponding to 17th Baisakh, 1360 B. S. Thursday. We draw herebelow the birth and Navamsa Charts and give planetary
-degrees and number of Navamsa they consumed:-

Jata-danda is II danda 3 Pala 24 bipala (rectified according to
:Pranpada) to be taken as 12 danda,
Janma Nakshatra-16, Janma Lagna Rasi-3 total is 31. This is a constant figure.
   We may arrange Planets' degree and number or Navamsa lhey consumed.
Degree of Planets.Nakshatra.No.of Na,amsa.Ravi0•-16"-18'25Chandra6•-2'l"-59'169Mangal1•-6"-4'32Budhall•-23"-20'277Vrhaspathi1,-4•-37'32Sukra(R)11!·22"-21'277Sani(R)5,.29•.33,149Rahu9!-14°-33'22SKctu3•-14"-33'85To explain the working process of Shayanadi bhava we shall

96	HINDU SOIENOE OF' THE F'UTU B
work out Sbayanadi bbava of Ravi only.  Our readers can get
practical idea of calculation of the bbavas of all other planer..
1. Planet's number	1
2. Planet's Naksbatra	2
3. Planet's Navamsa	5
Thatis:	1X2X5=	10
Add to this number	31.  This is the constant figuro sbow1>
already.
Total	41
This number 41 is to be divided by 12
Remainder	5. This is the Shesanka digit.

   5 indicates that Ravi is in Gamana bhava (Seethe list ot' symbols and their meaning ).
Here comes the questions of "Swaranka" & "Dhruvanka"'.
Swaranka	"Dhruvanko.'" of Planets,
1	2	3	4	s	Ravi	s
A	I	u	E	0	Chandra	2
K	Kil G Gh Ch		 Maogal		l Chh ]		Jh T	Th		Budba	l D   Db  Tba  Thha Dh		Vrhaspathi
Dhh   N    p	F	B	Sukra	3
V	M	y	R	La	Sani	3
w	Sh	Shh	s	H	Rahu & Ketu	4eac!.
   [ It is difficult to write Swaranka in English because Indian alphabetic letters cannot be pronounced in English tongue and therefore exact translation is not possible]
The  name of  the native is Hiren, So, first letter ia "H",.
Swaranka is therefore "511•
4th Step :  Shesanka digit ( in the 3rd step ) is 5
5•	25
Swaranka	5
Total	30	to be divided by 12,
the remainder	6
add with this digit dhruvanka
of Ravi	5
Total	11	to be divided by 3
remainder is 2 which indicates "chesta"
  This means Ravi who is in Gamana Bhava will give maximum, result.  It may be gooJ or bad, which we shall soc later on.

PLANETS IN DIFFERENT BHA VAS AND RESULTS THEREOF
RAVI
   (\) In Sbayana bhava: The native may be suffering from indigestion, colic pain, piles, or disease in anus and may be always in distress.
   (2) In Upaveshana bbau : Poverty-stricken, expert mechanic, quarrelsome, ill-educated, cruel, unhappy and passes his days in servitude.
   (3) Ill Netrapani bbava : If Ravi being in that bhava occupies 5th, 7th, 9th and 10th places from Lagoa the native will be robust; strong, always cheerful, conscientious, benevolent, very happy, and feels himself very much dignified due to the charitable disposition to him by king or head of the State.
   According to "Jataka Chandrika" if Ravi be placed in any other houses other than 5th, 7th, 9th or 10th place from Jagna, the native may he cruel hearted, hot-tempered and envious of others, and he may he suffering from eczema, itches, and eye disease.
   (4) Ill Prakasbana bhava: The native may be wealthy, a good parliamentarian, pious, very strong built, a good looking person of excellent complexion and respectable, If Ravi under this bhava occupies 7th or 5th house from lagna the native's first born son dies early and he becomes a widower.
   (5) In Gamana bhava: The native lives in a foreign land. He is unhappy, lazy, timid, short-tempered, and bereft of money and intellect.
  {6) Ill Gamanechha bhava : Cruel hearted, misguided intelligence, miserly, addicted to other's wife. If Ravi under this bhava is posited in the 2nd or 12th place from lagna the native's sons die at early ages and the native may have no wealth.
   (7) In Savabasatl bhava : The native is pious, religious. minded, physically strong and stout, versatile in many branches of knowledge, a man of very zharitable disposition, and of blemishless conduct, orator and benevolent. His residence is full of relatives and varieties of men. His treasury always remains full.
7

98	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
  (8) In Agama bhava: The native is restive and fickleminded, wicked, lean and thin, haughty, miserable, creates trouble for others, and he never enjoys happiness and mental peace.
   (9) In Bhojana bbava : The native suffers from gout, headache, disease of ears; he is a liar and al ways indulges in slang talks, addicted to meat and is never happy.
   (10) In Nrityalipsa bbava: The native always enjoys the company of learned and wise men. He himself is II learned man, energetic, wealthy and benevolent. He may have two w:ves and becomes a "Yogi" of high order.
   (II) In Kautuka bhava: The native is a lo,er of poetry, learned, wise and is held in high esteem by others, has good wife and many friends.
   (12)  In Nidra bhava:  The native resides in a foreign land, is poor, suffers from miseries, loses money and becomes a widower.

CHANDRA
   (1) In Shayana bhava: The native loses his accumulated money, lustful ( lascivious), is very much afrdd of cold weather but he is respected by others.
   According to 'Jataka Chandrika' Chandra in this bhava gives very bad re,ult, such as: 'The native is hot tempered, a man of loose morals, and poor. He suffers from disease in anus.'
   (2) In Upavesbana bbava: The nat:ve ic. sickly. spoils good work, steals other's money, unscrupulous and wickedminded, and may be attacked by four-footed animal.
   (3) In Netrapani bhava: The native is too much talkative, possesses diseased health, cunning, indulges in dishonest activities, suffers from Filaria in leg, has poisonous nails and he is a man of medium height.
   (4) In Prakasbana bhava: The native becomes rich, intelligent, charitable and is a man of many virtues. Some astrologers are of opinion that the native is addicted to others' wife or wives.
(5) In Gamana bbava :  The native is timid, cruel, sinful, and
suffers from eye-disease.
   (6) In Gamanecbha bbava: The native commits sinful acts secretly, has no honest thinking, and has diseases ia legs.

PLANETS IN DIFFERENT BHAVAS AND RESULTS THEREOII'	99

<Others are of opinion that he is very respectable, has no wealth and suffers from disease in leg.
   (7) In Savabesati bhava : The native is extraordinarily beautiful, temperamentally peaceful, king of kings, a very best man in societ}, and is a man of very charitable dispositic,n and is also a large-hearted man.
   (8) Io Agama bbava: The native is talkative, pious and rich. If it is waning Chandra the native may have two wives, he will be wicked and haughty.
   (9) In Bhojana bbava :	The native is blessed with good wife and children, owns conveyances, possesses wealth and is popular. Others are of opinion that the native is greedy and a voracious eater of meat and  very  rich ; after  birth of many
daughters he dies.
   (IO) Io Nrityalipsa bhava : If Chandra is of bright half the native is artistic, a good musician, humourist and strong and stout. If it is the waning Chandra the native indulges in sinful acts.
   (II)  i:n Kautuka bhava:  The native is as rich as a king and is very powerful, develops great artistic skill and likes to learn many things from different brancilee of knowledge. He is adored by beautiful women.
   (12) In Nidra bhava: If Chandra conjoins with Vrhaspathi the native will be a noble man, if not the native loses his money
.and due to premature death of wife he laments over her death.
MANGAL
   (I) In Shayana bhava: The native suffen from itches, ringworm and small boils and is an efficient rnan. Some are of
·opinion tbat the native knows many languages. He is short­ tempered, lascivious and very efficient but fickleminded.
   (2) In UpavesbRna bbava: The native indulges in sinful acts, forsakes his own rcligi-ius belief and becomes rich but he is a liar. Other astrologers are of opinion that the native is a man of very vile character and cruel. He is rich but he is abandoned by his own kith and kin.
(3i  In Netrapani bhava :  If Mangal is posited in  Lagoa  the
native will be a poor man. Other astrolo,;ers say, if Mangal occupies any place between lagna and 10th house ( both the places included),  the native loses everything  including wife,

100	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE

children and wealth.  But some other experienced astrologers are of opinion that Mangal in Netrapani bhava will give th1> above results if he occupies 9th & 10th houses only, in other houses the planet will give very beneficial result concerning the native's financial stability and other material happiness.
   (4) In Prakashana bbava: There are various opinions about the effect of Mangal under this bhava. Maharshi Parasar says, the native will be meritorious and respectable, but if Mangat occupies the 5th place from lagna with Rahu there the native·s children and wife will meet with premature death.
Other astrologers say Mangal  under  Prakashana  bbava can
do no good to the native.
   (5) In Gamaoa bbava : The native suffers from small boils and entire body is covered with painful itches and ringworm, and loses his wealth.
   (6) In Gamanechba bhava: The native is meritorious, wealthy, destroyer of enemies, always helps ameliorate the miseries of his relatives and moves on elephant ( i.e. he has very good conveyance to move about ), others say Mangat under this. t,hava is not favourable; the native suffers from disease in anus and always engages himself in bad works.
   (7) In Savabasatl bhava:  If Mangat under this bhava is posited in his exalted house the native will be a great warrior; wealthy and virtuous ; if the planet occupies 5th or 9th house the native may have no money, wife and children, but in places. other then these two houses Mangat gives the native money and prestige.
   (8) In Agama bbava: Mangat is awfully unfavourable as the native despises religious deeds, always moves in bad company and suffers from a serious type of abscess at the base point of ear.  Many others do not agree with this opinion.
(9) In Bhojana bhava ;  If Mangat under this bhava is strong
the native likes sweets too much, he engages himself in vile acts and is respected by none. Some say that if the planet occupies the 8th place from lagna the native may meet with accidental death or he may be killed by an animal.
   (10) In Nrityalipsa bhava : The native becomes very rich and owns a palatial building. Others say, the planet makes him a man of charitable disposition, highly respectable and king's

PLANETS IN DIPFERENT BHAVAS AND RESULTS THEREOF  101

minister. Others are of opinion that this planet under this bhava if posited in lagna, 2nd, 7th or 10th house the native will get very best results but if the planet occupies 8th or 9th houses the native suffers from many miseries and may meet with accidental death.
   (11) lo Kaotuka bbau: The native is bestowed with good friends and children. If Mangal occupies the house of exaltation the native rises to the position of an important learned member of the King's Court by dint of his own merit and his qualities of head and heart are appreciated by all. Some of the astrologers say Mangal in the 5th or 9th house will not give the aforcsc ., beneficial result, on the other hand his wife and son may meet with premature death.
   (12) In Nidra bbava: The native is bereft of education an.d wealth ; he is cunning and has no religious scruple and suffers from diseases in arms.
BUDHA
   (I) In Sbayana bbava: The native has a defective limb, he may be lame or without any limb when Budha is in lagna. If Budba occupies any place other than lagna the native becomes cunning and a man of loose morals.
   (2) In Upavesbana bbava : The native is bestowed with all virtues, if the planet is aspected by a benefic the native will be rich, if it is aspected by a malefic planet the native will be poor.
   There are different opinions also, one of them is that the native wiU be an eloquent speaker, happy and a poet of high
<:alibre.
   (3) In Netrapanl bhava : The native has no education and without conscientiousness. He is proud and tries to harm others. If this planet under this bbava is posited in the fifth place from lagna his first son meets with premature death. After that son many daughters are born to him. If Budha is in the 10th place from lagna the native is held in high esteem by all and he is cespected like a king.
   (4) In Prakashana bhava: The native is benevolent, kind and sympathetic to others, pious, versatile in many branches of knowledge, a conscientious person and curve wicked activities of bad men.

102	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE

   (5) & (6) In Gamana and Gamanecbba bhavas:	According to· Maharsbi Parasar the native earns wealth and builds a house of his own.  Others are of opinion that Budha gives very bad result if he is under these bhavas.
(7) In Savabasati bhava:  The native is a devotee of Gods,
religious-minded, temperate, prosperous and wealthy. Others are of opinon that native has no education at early stage of his life but in the long run becomes a great scholar, rich, pious and very sickly. There is another school who says that when Budha under this bhava is posited in the 7th house from lagna the native enjoys material happiness all through his life but if the planet occupies 5th or 12th house from lagna he has many children and is a miser.
   (8) In Agama bhava : The native aspires after accumulation of money by acts of very low standard and he is father of twin children. The other astrologers say that the native is a mean­ minded fellow and worst type of man.
   (9) In Bbojana bbava : The native is lean and thin and he nas no money to meet his both ends and has no conjugal happiness. Others are of opinion that by the left side of his belly there is nngworm, small boils and he is attacked with bad type of leucoderma.  He is envious of others, ane poor.
   (10) In Nrityalipsa bhava : The !lative is rich, a scholar. very cheerful, meritorious, happy, powerful, and is blessed with sons. Some astrologers say that the native bas four sons and one daughter. Othe1s are of opinion that the native has three quali­ fied wives (which is not possible under the p.esent law of the land). According to Parasari Hora if Budha is afflicted the native will be a man of loose m rals.
   (11) In Kautuka bhava: The native is very popular. expert in the art of song and stringed instruments, wealthy, pious. suffers from piles and has many enemies.
   (12) Io Nidra bhava : The native suffers from various. diseases and miseries, he seldom enjoys sound sleep but he is rich and is respected by many. According to some astrologers Budha occupying 9th place from lagna will give aforesaid result but if he occupies any other place the native enjoys happiness all through his life.

PLANETS IN DIFFERENT BHA.VAS AND RESULTS THEREOF	103

VRHASPATHI
   (I) In Sbayana bbava: The native is  tall figure and has very fair complexion.  He always remains afraid of bis ene,nies.
   There is a different opinion, according to which the native suffers from colic pain and many more diseases but he is a qualified and efficient man. Some astrologers say that if Vrhas­ pathi under this bhava occupies lagna, 5th, 7th, 9th or 10th place the native is rich, learned and a man of good conduct.
   (2) In Upavesbana  bhava:  The  native is talkative, proud, a powerful man like an emperor, aod is worshipped by bis enemies.  His leg, thigh and face are full of small !:>oils.  There is another opinion too, accordiog to which the native is highly educated, a great and noble man and meritorious if Vrhaspathi occupies 2nd, 3rd, 10th or 12th place from lagna and his health remains perfectly alright.
   (3) In Netrapani bhava: The native is a lover of song and dancing. He is lustful and a man of very fair complexion. There is a second opinion, according to which the native suffers from headache and becomes rich.
   (4) In Prakasbana bhava :  The native bas many virtues, he is energetic and has great personality, and a lord of wealth and c<>stly gems. Others are of opinion that if Vrbaspathi occupies lagne or 10th place the native will be a prince.
   (5) In Gamana bhava: The native is brave, and always moves with many friends and admirers. He is a great scholar, learned in Vedas and is wealthy. Others are of opinion that the native may have danger from snake, attends bis duties with determination, acquires wealth of others, he is sufferer of colic pain and engages himself in social works to ameliorate miseries of others.
   (6) Ill Gamanecbba bbava : The native is held in high esteem by otb,rs and earns great popularity, a moo of charitable disposition, rich and serves the king of the land very faithfully.
   (7) Jn Savabasati bbava: The native earns great popularity and is adored by many; he is very rich, a good orator, has ego for his learning and is a good looking person. Others are of opinion that if Vrhaspathi occupies lagna, 4tl! or 7th place the aforesaid good result is possible.  Again there is another class of astrologers who say that if unfortunately Vrlrnspathi is posited

104	HINDU SCIBNCE OF THE FUTURE

in the 8th or 10th places from lagna the native loses his every­ thing and passes the rest of his life miserably.
   (8) Io Agama bhava: The native is extraordinarily brilliant and highly educated and there is no equal to him; he is a multimillionaire, owns many vehicles and is a very happy man.
(9) In Bhojana bhava :  The native is a great warrior, sweet­
ton gued, happy, lustful and a voracious eater of meat.
   (10) In Nrityalipsa bhan: The native is a great philologist. respected by the king of the land, an expert in Tantra-shastra, pious and rich. Some astrologers are of opinion that the native is a man of loose morals, rich and al the Slme time religiously inclined and a multimillionaire.
(1!)  In Kautuka bhava : The native is a great wealthy man.
happy, physically very strong, a great scholar, an expert in many branches of arts, and always cheerful.
   [12) In Nidra bhna: The native has no education, he is without any virtue or piety and aimlessly roams hither and thither.
SUKRA
   (I) In Shayana bhan : The native is a man of loose morals. enjoys other's wife or wives, very hot-tempered and suffers from teeth-disease. There are various different opinions about Sukra being under Shayana bhava, some are good and others had.
   (2) In Upavesbaoa bha'8: The native's treasury is full of costly gems and huge money ; he is happy in many respects, a conqueror of enemies, and a man of prestige and dignity. Other astrologers say that the native is very strong, proud and has an ulcer in right part of bis body and suffers from gout.
   (3) In Netrapani bhava: If Sukra occupies places other than Iagna, 4th or 10th place from lagna the native owns a palatial building. If those places are 0wncd by Sukra's friends then only the aforesaid beneficial results are possible.
   Some other eminent astrologers hold very bad opinion in this respect.  They say that if Sukra under this bhava occupy the
]0th place from lagna the native becomes very poor, even the ocean will dry up at the sight of this man.  If that 10th house is owned by friends of Sukra or that place is Sukra's exalted house than the native is prosperous and enjoys life happily like a king.

PLANETS IN DIFFERENT BIIAVAB AND RESULTS THEREOF	105
   (4) In Prakashana hhan: If under this bhava Sukra occupies his own exalted house or the house of his friend the native becomes a poet, expert in many branches of art, a great music :1n and humourist. Some are of opinion if Sukra occupies his debilitated house the native will be a sickly man all through his life and lives in a foreign land.
(5) In Gamana hhava: The native's mother dies at her early
age and the native has some sort of disease at the lower part of feet. Others are of opinion that the lower part of the native's feet will be diseased no doubt but the native will be energetic,
.skilful in technical matters and happy.
   (6) In Gamanechha hhava: The native is wealthy. energetic and visits holi shrines. There are diseases in his hand and feet. There are other astrologers who say that the mother and brother of the native die premature death and the native himself is ickly.
(7) In Sa,abasati hhava : The native comes of a high family ;
he is very rich, a king's minister, very efficient and a sufferer from colic pain. There are other class of astrologers who say that if Sukra occupies his enemy's house or is associated with or is aspectcd by his enemy the native becomes a pauper and suffers from many ailments.
(8) In Agama bhava : The native feels very much distressed
,owing to suffering from various ailments and has to lament over premature death of his children. There are some astrologers who are of opinion that the above results are possible if Sukra under this bhava occupies enemy-house or is associated with or aspected by enemies. If Sukra is posited in the 2nd, 4th, 8th or 12th place the native enjoys happiness in all spheres of life.
   (9) In Bhojana bhava : The native suffers from colic pain, he is always afraid of his enemies, unhappy and has to live in foreign land. Other opinion is that if Sukra is afflicted due to aspect by or association with inimical planets the result said "bove are possible, otherwise the native will be strong, pious, very rich and shall earn huge money through business.
   (10) Nrityalipsa bhava : The native is highly educated, a poet. an artist, and rich.  His merit, as a poet gradually develops. Some other astrologers say that if Sukra  occupies the  house of
,debilitation  the  native must be ao  illiterate person but if the

106	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE

planet sits in his exalted house or he is otherwise favourable the native will be a prince, handsome, very rich, a man of slightly dark but charming complexion; he is a loan and thin person and has very loo'e morals.
(II) In Kautuka  bhava:  The n,tive is rich,  pious,  very
cheerful. an eloquent speaker and has a good wifa and many sons. If Sukra is debilitated the result is very bad.
   (12) In Nidra bhava: The native indulges in loose talks, engages Umself in serving others, speaks ill of others and is a traveller.
SANI
   (1) Shayana bhava: At ilis early age the native is unable to app,.ase his hunger for want of two meals and is a sickly person and afterwards luck favours him very much.
   Some astrologers say that the native is lascivious and a man· of bad character, talkative and suffers from disease in anus. Another opinion is that if Sani occupies the 7th or 8th place from lagna the native vanquishes his enemies and lives in a foreign country; but if the planet is posited in 5th, 9th or 11th house from lagna the native is happy and pious and is blessed with sons.
  (2) In Upaveshana bhava: The native is an egoist, punished by the king of the land, suffers from ringworm and he loses his accumulated money.
(3) Netrapani bhava : The native is the husband of a very
beautiful woman, he is an expert artist, pious and always tries to advance the cause of the king.
   Another opinion is that if Soni occupies lagna or 10th house the native becomes a pauper and passes his days very miserably.
   Again some other astrologers say that if Sani under this bhava is situated in 5th or 7th houses the native loses his wife
{ i.e. his wife dies a prematur,, death ) and  money  but in other
places Sani gives the native many sources to enjoy bis life very happily.
  (4) In Prakashana bbava: The native has many virtues and qualities of head and heart, he is intelligent, kind to others, rich and a devotee of God "Hari".
Others are of opinion that if Sani occu ics lagna or 7th house

PLANETS IN DIFFERENT BIIA VAS AND RESULTS TIIEllEOF	107
the native totally loses his mental peace and is never happy and is the cause of extinction of his clan { fam:ily ),
   (5) In Gamana bhava: The native becomes very rich. Others are of opinion that the native suffers from disease in the leg, is very hot-tempered and haughty, miser and always speaks ill of others.
   (6) In Gamanechha bhava : The native suffers from piles and fissure and is a most unfortunate man without son and wife.
   (7) In Savabasati bhava : The native is highly qualified and meritorious and a wealthy man and has good wife and children. But if Sani occupies his enemy-house or aspected by or in conjunction with enemy planets the native loses his everything.
   (8) In Agama bhava: The native is hot-tempered, he has danger from snakes and is a man of diseased health, and his brothers are shortlived.
   Other astrologers are of opinion that if Sani occupies 2nd, 3rd, 5th & 7th places the native is highly educated and has good wife and children.
   (9) In Bhojana bhava : The native is attacked with many diseases, such as, indigestion, colic pain, piles and fissure and disease of eyes. If Sani is situated in his own house or house of his exaltation, the native is blessed with a son of perfectly good health and his son becomes popular and he has no enemy.
   (10) In Nrityalipsa bhava: The native is a very pious man, wealthy and is held in high esteem by the king of the land ; he proves himself a great warrior in the battlefield.
   Other astrologers say, Sani being in. the 5th, 9th, 7th or 10th place the native has very baJ health and becomes a pauper and at the same time his son meets with prematv.re death.
   (11) In Kautuka bbava: The native becomes very rich, efficient, benevolent and is a great scholar.
   (12) In Nidra bbava: The native is wealthy, endowed with artistic qualities, powerful, lover of poetry and is addicted to harlots. Other astrologers differ from this opinion; they say, !he native suffers from disease in the loin or waist. gastritis etc. He has two wives and many sons.
   If Sani is associated with 5th or 7th place from lagna the native enjoys material happiness hut is envious of others.

108	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
RAHU
   (I) In Shayana bhava: The native passes his days very miserably and is hot-tempered. If Rahu occupies Vrsa or Mithuna rasi he is financially affluent. There are other astrologers who say that Rahu also in Simha or Kanya rasi gives the same result i.e. the native becomes rich and happy.
(2) In Upaveshana bbava: The native is attacked with disease
of ring worm and is in distress. Some astrologers say that he is in distressed condition due to wrath of the king but is very rich.
   (3) In Netrapani bbava : The native suffers from many diseases and loses his mental peace, and he is always afraid of enemies and thieves; loss of money is another cause of his distress.
(4) In Prakasbana bbava :  The native has beautiful appear­
ance; financially he is affluent; he is respected by all and earns
prestige and reputation.
   Others are of opinion if Rahu under this bhava occupies Simha or Karkata rasi the native is beheaded by enemies.
   (5) In Gamana bbava : According to Maharsbi Parasar the native is a great scholar, benevolent, he has sons and is respected by the king of the land, but there are some astrologers who are of opinion that Rahu under this bhava makes the native mean, sickly, unhappy, miserly and he always speaks ill of others.
(6) In Gamanechha bhava : The native has no intelligence and
wealth, he is a short-tempered man, miser, lustful and crooked.
(7) In Savabasatl bbava: The native has many virtues, he is
wealthy but miser, and a scholar.
   (8) In Agama bhava : The native is a cheat, afraid of his enemies, picks up quarrel with noble friends and unhappy.
   Other astrologers say that he learns many languages and can speak in many dialogues.
   (9) In Bhojana bbava: The native is greedy, wicked, quarrel­ some and unhappy.
   (IO) In Nrityalipsa bbava: The native always apprehends danger from his enemies, he loses his money and forsakes his religious belief, suffers from eye disease and other serious diseases.
  (II) In Kautuka bhava : The native is addicted to otbers' wives, steal others' property or money. According to some astrologers when Rahu occupies his own house or house of exaltation these

PLANETe IN DIFPEBENT BRAVAS AND BESULTS THEBEOF	109

results arc possible, in other houses he becomes rich and lives in
peace with wife and children.
   (12) Io Nidra bhava : The native is highly qualified, proud and very rich. According to some astrologers Rahu in Nidra bhava does not bestow any favourable result in respect of money and family peace. Again there is another opinion according to which Rahu in 5th or 7th house gives the native wealth and happiness.
KETU
   (I) In Sbayana bbava: When Ketu occupies Yrsa, Mithuna or Kanya Rasi the native becomes prosperous and wealthy, in other place Ketu under this bhava may cause worries, anxieties and many diseases.
   (2) In Upavesbaoa bbava : Suffering due to attack of rheuma­ tism, gout and ringworm, and also serious mental anxiety owing to king's wrath, activities of enemies and thieves.
   (3) In Netrapaoi bhava: Venomous Snake-bite, apprehension of punishment by king, inimical activities of some one.
(4) Io Prakashana bbava :  Energetic, pious, temperate, rich.
and good service to king.
   (5) In Gamana bhava : Blessed with many sons, a scholar, highly qualified, benevolent, very rich and a great man.
(6) In Gamanechha bbava : Always jealous of others, speaking
ill of others, very sickly, and suffers from loss of money.
   (7) In Savabasati bbava : Indulging in light talks, miser, proud, lascivious, wicked & cunning but vastly learned in many branches of knowledge.
   (8) In Agama bhava : Al ways engaged in sinful acts, quarre­ lling with friends, wicked, afflicted by enemies and diseases.
(9) In Bhojana bhava : Poverty-,tricken, diseased and roaming
aimlessly.
   (10) ID Nityalipsa bhava: Disabled due to various diseases, wicked and cunning.
   (11) In Kautuka bbava: Displaced from permanent residence, wicked, poor, addicted to wine and women.
   (12) Io i'iidra bhava :	Highly qualified and meritorious, monetarily affluent and bappy.

CHAPTER-IV
GENERAL RULES FOR DETERMINING MERIT OF MOODS OR BHAVAS
   First rule: Certain planets have been described as auspicious and certain others inauspicious. In determination of moods also this division into auspicious and inauspicious is expected. Of the moods, tbe 4th, 5th, the Lagna, the 9th and 10th moods are auspicious ; the 6th, 8th and 12th moods are considered to be inauspicious. The 7th and 2nd moods are considered to be mixture of both. If a naturally benefic planet is the lord of an unfavourable ( inauspicious ) house the results are considered to be inauspicious in an overall way, though the natural goodness of that planet is not altogether lost. Besides all these the 3rd and 11th bhavas (or moods) are considered to be unfavourable and together with the 6th, the trio is described as "tri-sarhayadhi­ pathi'' (3rd, 6th & llth). The lords of these trio houses (bhavas or moods) are also considered to be unfavourable.
   It may be added however that the house for income (i.e. the 11th house) is by no meins wholly devoid of good attributes. The good may b: reduced out some of it will be there.
   The 3rd, 6th, 10th & 11th are called "Upachaya" houses, and in these houses naturally malefic planets give good results.
   The influences of naturally berrefic planets in conjunction with or aspected by other bznefic are good. If they occupy or aspect any bhava they will do good to that bhava. But if the same bhava is influenced by both auspicious and inauspicious planets results will be mixed. The point of difference is that whichever of the two ( i.e. auspicious and inauspicious) is stronger he will make more of its characteristic contribution.
 2. When the benefic planet is aspected by or is in conjunction with an enemy planet that would weaken the both and the result will be determined by the strcnger one. This means that if the enemy planet is stronger the result will not be favourable and in case of the stronger benefic the result is expected to be slightly favourable.

RULES FOR DETERMINING MERIT OF MOODS OR BHAVAS	111
3. A natural benefic or a  malefic planet if combust or is
-posited in an unfavourable bhava {the 6th, 8th and J2th bhavas are termed as unfavourable) is considered to be weak and is not expected to give favourable result.
   4. Nicha Vanga Yoga: When a planet is debilitated and the lord of that rasi occupies his exalted house the debilitated planet regains his strength.	For instance, Vrhaspathi (Jupiter) is debilitated in Makar Rasi (Capricorn) ano Sani, the lord of Makar Rasi is posited in Tula (Libra), Vrhaspathi regains his strength though he is in his debilitated house.	Again, if a debilitated planet is in conjunction with another planet that occupies his exalted house, the former regains his strength. As for example: Budha is in Mina Rasi which is Bud ha's debilitated house and is in conjunction with Sukra (Venus) there in Mina Rasi. Budha is no longer weak, or Sukra in Kanya Rasi is in conjunction with Budha, or Mangal in Karkat is associated with Vrhaspathi and so on.
   These planetary relations are called Nicha Vanga Yoga. Renowned Astrologers have described other Nicha Vanga Yogas, which are as follows :
   (a) If a planet is debilitated and the lord of the house where that planet is situated occnpies his own or Mooltrikona house this is also a Nicha Vanga yoga. Some astrologers are of opinion that if the lord of the sign (rasi) where the debilitated planet is situated occupies his own or mooltrikona or friendly house Nichavanga Yoga ;;ccurs.
   (b) Again "Kumar Swamyam" a most important Tamil book on astrology is of opinion that both the debilitated and exalted planets when conjoined with each other and are placed in a Kendra from Chandra then only Niclla Vanga Yoga occurs.
(c) According to "Phaladipika" if the debilitated  planet is
aspected by the lord of the house where the planet is debilitated then also this yoga occurs.
(d) If the debilitated planet is aspected by or is in conjunc­
tion with the lord of the house where that -;lebilitated planet is exalted Nicha Vanga Yoga is to be admitted. Such as, Vrhaspathi's debilitated house is Makar (Capricorn) and Karkata (Cancer) is his house of exaltation and lord thereof is Chandra. Now, if debilitated Vrhaspathi is aspected by or is in conjunction

112	HINDU SCIBNCB OP THB i'llTUllB

with Chandra Yrhaspathi regains his strength due to the aspect of Chandra.
   5. When a planet occupying an inauspicious house is aspected by or is in conjunction with a benefic planet his unfavourable result will be mitigated to some extent.
   6. If the lords of the 6th, 8th or 12th are related to each other by exchange of their houses, or by conjunction or by mutual aspect the unfavourable results of those houses represented by the planets are mitigated and good result may be predicted.
   This is called "Yiparita Raja Yoga". As for instance, if the lord of the 6th house occupies the 8th from lagna or there is
• change of aspect or houses then the bad result expecting from both the 6th and 8th houses is diminished and favourable result ensues.
  7. If the bhava or its lord are not strong, good or bad result whatever it may be should not be expected.
   (a) When a house (or sign) is occupied by a benefic planet but the lord of that house is either weak or in an inauspicious. house under such circumstance it may be slightly difficult to give correct verdict.
   This is to be noted that the lord of the house is the primary factor for consideration. If the lord of the house is favourably disposed and strong, the bhava under consideration is expected to. give desired result.
   (b) Again if the house under question is occupied by a malefic, the house (i.e. the bhava) will be weak no doubt but the good result will not be lost but one should say that good result may be attained through some strenuous effort.
   (c) If the lord of the house in question is weak that weakness cannot be repaired fully inspite of occupation of a henefic planet in that house, only the unfavourable result due to weakness of the bhava-lord may be diminished to some extent. Similar deduction may be made, in case a bhava is occupied by a malefic but the lord thereof is strong and favourable.
   8. While considering the merit or demerit of a bhava the bhava under consid_eration is to be taken as a lagna and if there are beneficial planets in Kendra or Kona from that lagna and the lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th places from that bhava (which we take for the present as lagna) are favourably placed or the

RULES FOR DBTEBl"IINING MERIT OF MOODS OR BRAVAS	113

bhava is not influenced by the aspect of or conjunction with the lords of dusthanas (viz. 6th, 8th or 12th lords from the original lagna) and/or the bhava is aspected by or is in conjunction with auspicious planets the bhava or its lord or both will impart good result.
  (a) If an auspicious bhava-lord occupies a Kendra or Kona house from lagna both the bhava and its lord are favourable and beneficial result will yield.
   (b) If that lord of the auspicious bhava is placed in any inauspicious  house ( 6th, 8th & 12th houses ) from  that bhava the bhava-lord under consideration becomes weak and unfavourable.
   The rule No. 8 (a) & (b) l!eeds further elucidation to remove misunderstanding arising out of such directives. Say for example, the lord of the 9th house (house of luck) while occupying the 4th place from lagna is expected to give good result as the 9th Ion: is in Kendra from lagna. But according to rule No. 8 (b) the 9th lord being in the 8th place from the 9th bhava should not be considered as favourably disposed. So, the lord of the 9th house may be considered as weak and unfavourahle. Now, it is apparently evident that two rules No. 8 (a) & (b) are self-contra­ dictory. Then how to compromise between these two opposite directives? Under such circumstance the finding should be that the native shall be prosperous, and lucky ( as the 9th lord is in Kendra from Lagoa) but initially there may be difficulties a.nd various kind of obstacles in getting good results ( because the 9th lord is placed in the 8th place from the 9th house ).
   9. A weak bhava-lord inspite of bis favourable ownership occupying a Kendra or Kona house from Lagna cannot yield favourable result upto expectation.
  (a) If a bhava-lord is combust, debilitated or in any other way weak good result should not be expected.
   (b) Similarly if a planet otherwise strong, is aspected by or is in conjunction with the lord of the 6th, 8th or 12th house favourable result will be diminished to a great extent.
   IO. A n11tural malefic when situated in an Upachaya house yields good result. [3rd, 6th, 10th & 11th houses are called Upachaya house]. We have already indicated that 6th, 8th& 12th houses are called Dusthanas meaning malefic or unfavourable
8

114	HINDU SCIBNCB OF THE FUTURE
houses.  6th house is both an Upachaya and Dusthana.  So in case of a natural malefic being in dusthana (6th house) which is at the same time an Upachaya house what would be our finding ? In such contradictory directives the readers should adjust their reasoning and give their verdict as reasonably as it should be. As for example, Sani ( Saturn ) is a natural malefic and in a native's birth chart he as the lord of the 9th place occupies the 6th from lagna. As the lord of the 9th house while associated with the 6th place Sani though in Upachaya can not be fwourable so far the native's luck is concerned.  But this should be noted that Sani is posited in a Kendra from the 9th house ( 6th place is the 10th house from the 9th ). So, he is favourable, he is in Upachaya-sthan, this is also a favourable position. Therefore we may safely come to a conclusion that if the planet ( Sani ) is not otherwise unfavourable Sani will prove favourable to the native and he!p him prosper in life.
   11. Any planet occupying the 2nd or 11th house is said to be favourably disposed and is expected to give the native money or wealth etc. But if the planet owns dusthan ( i.e. 6th, 8th or 12th house ) he will be harmful in respe t of the native's earning and wealth. But this is to be remembered that any planet, be he the lord of any of the dusthanas occupying the 11th house will help the native earning money but due to ownership of an inauspicious house the native shall have to strain bis nerve to earn money.
   12. A planet just in cusp of two bhavas loses his capacity to give any beneficial result, on the other hand a planet in the middle position of a bhava gives the exact result be it favourable or unfavourable.
   (a) A planet while crossing the midpoint of a bhava approaches towards the cusp and loses by and by its strength to impart desired result. Again when a planet approaches the midpoint of a bhava he regains its strength.
   (b) While a planet crossing the midpoint of a bhava approaches the cusp he can initially give slightly good or bad result as the case may be, but in the long run he cannot give any result whatsoever.
   13. It is said that a planet in or near the cuap cannot give any result, this does not mean that the planet has no strength to

IIIJLES FOB DETEl\MINING MERIT OF MOODS 011 BHAVAS 115

yield any result at all. Whe11 it is said the planet cannot give any result when he is in the cusp of a bhava it means that the planet's position in the bhava is absolutely inetfective, but the planet is expected to give the result of the rasi he occupies and of the Nakshatra with which he is associated.
   14. If the nature of the planet and the nature of the house it occupies are in tune with one another then .he character of the effects to be expected of such a combination becomes clear and well-defined.	If they do not agree they cancel out one another, never completely but' partially. Take the following illustration: Sani is in the Mesa ( Aries ).	Mesa is a house fire intensive whereas Sani is antipodal to fire. Fire gives brightness, light, and also rapid dynamic effects, whereas Sani is slow,dull-looking and more or less static, Then again, Sani is debilitated in Mesa Rasi. So, a combination of these would amount to an intensi.. fication of the darker and more unpleasant aspects of  Sani.
There would be a sort of working syntheses, but it would be jerky or fugitive.
   15. The constellation (Nakshatra) with which the planet is associated adds its quota to the amalgam. It would enhance or diminish as the case may be the quality of the resultant of the combination. For instance, Vrhaspathi gives good effect in 'Pusyam' Nakshatra (Constellation), on the other hand in 'Aslesha' Nakshatra Vrhaspathi is slightly weak because neutral and out of tune. But as the rasi is Karkata the weakness of Vrhaspathi would not effect much, because the house itself has considerable affinity with Vrhaspathi.

Summary of the rules indicated above
   In judging a house the following points must be considered first :
  1. The location of the lord of the house, his st;ength, whether he is aspected by a benefic and at the same time a friendly planet. If the same lord is in conjunction with a benefic or with a malefic, a friendly or an enemy planet.
2. The strength of the bhava and its lord.
  3. The natural characteristics of the bhava and bhava-lord, the influence of aspect on them by another planet-auspicious or inauspicious must be taken into consideration.

116	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
   4. Position of the bhava-lord or the nature of the planet that occupies the house ( bhava ) under consideration, their strength or weakness due to their position in Navamsa chart are to be examiued thoroughly.
   These points were discussed in previous pages and to alert our readers we have again summarized them, which will help them give correct judgment.
When a planet is considered weak ?
  1. When Ravi is in conjunction with or aspected by Sani both of them are to be taken as weak.
   2, While Chandra is in conjunction with or aspected by either Sani or Rah u Chandra becomes weak and unfavourable.
   3. .When Sani and Mangal aspect or conjoins with each other both of them become weak and unfavourable.
   4. Budha while in conjunction with or a&pected by Mangat Budha becomes unfavourable.
   S. Similarly, when Vrhaspathi conjoins with or is aspected by Rahu, Vrhaspathi is weak. Conjunction of Sukra & Mangat or Mangal's aspect on Sukra and Rahu's conjunction with Ravi and Mangal are taken to be unfavourable. In such cases Vrhaspathi, Sukra, Ravi and Mangal will be more unfavourable.
   Besides the afore aid 14 rules, we must remember that strength of planets is to be measured in many more ways. We have repeated more than once that strength of bhava-lord is the most important factor.  Now, how to judge the strength will be shown in the following lines.
Delineation of Sada-Varga
   We shall discuss about Sada-Varga, and Dasa-Varga fi'rst and tell our readers how a planet becomes favourable and strong or unfavourable and weak.  Sada-Varga  means (!)  Kshetra,
(2)  Hora, (3)  Drekkan, (4)  Navamsa,  (5)  Dwadasamsa and
(6)  Trimsamsa.
Dasa-Varga  means these 6 Vargas and also (7) Samptamsa,
(8) Dasamamsa (9) Sorasamsa and (10) Sasthyamsa.
   In each case a separate chart is to be erected and planets and lagna are to be placed according to their sphuta or degree and minute.

BULBS FOR DETERMINING MERIT OF MOODS OR BHAVAS	117

(a)  Kshetra means the birthchart itself.
(t,) Hora, 15 amsa makes a 'hora' (1/2 of 30 amsa)
(c) Drekkan-10 amsa makes a Drekkan (t of 30 amsa)
  (d) Saptamsa-4 amsa 17 kala 8 bikala & 34 anukala ( which may be written as 4°-17'-8"-34"') makes Saptamsa ( of 30 amsa ),
   (e) Navamsa-3 amsa 20 kala (3'-20') makes a Navamsa (1/4 of 30 amsa)
(f) Dasamsa-3 amsa makes a Dasamsa {y10 of 30 amsa)
. (g) Dwadasamsa-2 amsa 30 kala (2°-30') makes a Dwadasamsa
(n of 30 amsa)
   (h) Sorasamsa-1 amsa 52 kala 30 bikala (l'-52'-30") makes a sorasamsa (l. of 30 amsa)
   (i) Trimsamsa table will show that the planetary placement will be different. When a planet in the birth chart is in a '/isama Rasi it wiJI be placed in Visama Rasi in the trimsamsa chart, when placed in a Sama Rasi it will be in Sama Rasi. Trimsamsa Chakra is not equally divided.
   (j) Sasthyamsa-30 kala makes a Sasthyamsa (/0 of 30 amsa) These different Vargas are to be judged from charts drawn separately in each case. Say, we know the Kshetra (i.e. the birth chart). We shall have to erect Hora-chart, Drekkan chart, Navamsa chart etc. separately and judge the strength or favour­ able state of a planet 01 otherwise in every chart and come to a decision about the strength or weakness of a planet and lagna. But there are rules in erecting a chart in each case and this may not be very easy to remember them or to determine the position of planets and lagna in all cases. Hence Varga charts are to be consulted.  These charts are given in the last chapters of this
book for ready reference.
   Now rules to erect different charts are stated below. To erect the charts we must know the 'Sphuta' (degree & minutes) of all the planets and oflagna.
  Hora; When a planet or lagna is posited in odd (Visam) Rasi and their sphutas are within 15 amsa (degrees etc.) then in the Hora-ch'lkra of that planet or lagna will be an Simha Rasi, and if sphuta is more than 15 amsa they will be in Chandra's rasi
t.e., Karkata. There are two Horas, one is Ra vi's and another
i• Chandra's hora.  If the planet or lagna is in even Ra si (janma

118	•HINDU SCIENCE OF THE P'll'TURE
rasi) and is placed in first 15 amsa the hora lord will be Chandra and beyond 15 amsa, the hora lord will be Ravi (i.e. Karkata and Sinha respectively).
   Drekkan :  When the planet or lagna is within 10 degrees of a Rasi the ruler of that rasi will be lord of the first drekkan, after 10 degree upto 20 degree, the 5th Rasi-lord from the position of the planet or lagna is the lord of 2nd drekkan and if the sphutas go beyond 20° degree the Lord of the 5th Rasi counted from the 2Qd drekkan will be lord of the 3rd drekkan.
   Saptamsa : When the planet or lagna is situated in the oja or odd or visam Rasi 1st lord will be ruler of the Rasi where lagna or planet is posited, the 2nd lord is the ruler of the rasi Mxt to the first and so on.
   When the planet or lagna is situated in even or Jugma or Sama Rasi the ruler of the 7th Rasi from the Rasi occupied by the planet or lagna will be first Saptamsa lord and 2nd lord will be the ruler of the next rasi and so on.
Navamsa :  If a planet or lagna occupies a chara rasi (movable
rasi) !st Navamsa lord will be the ruler of that house where they are posited. remember each Navamsa measures 3°-20' kala, the 2nd lord will be the ruler of the Rasi next to the !st Navamsa lord and so or.
   If the lagna or planet is in a Sthir (Fixed) Rasi the 1st Navamsa lord will be the ruler of 9th rasi from the position of the planet or lagna and 2nd lord is the ruler of next rasi counted from the ht Navamsa rasi and so on.
   If the lagna or planet is in Dwatyaka rasi (dual) the first Navamsa lord will be the ruler of the 5th rasi counted from the position of planet or Iagna in the birth chart and the second lord will be the ruler of the secon:I rasi next to the ht and so on.
   Dadasamsa: This is simple. The 1st lord is the ruler of the rasi where lagna or planet is situated. From that position the 2nd, 3rd and 4th lord etc. are to be counted.
Trimsamsa :  In case of odd rasi the first 5 amsa or degree is
ruled by Mangat, next 5 amsa or degree is ruled by Sani, the next 8 amsa by Vrbaspathi, next 7 amsa by Budha and next 5
:tmsa is ruled by Sukra.
In case of even rasi the 1st 5 amsa by Sukra, next 7 amsa

RULES FOR DETERMINING MERIT OF IIIOODS OR BR.I.VAS	119

by Budha, next 8 amsa by Vrhaspathi, next 5 amsa by Sani and last 5 amsa by Ma ngal.
   According to Maharshi Parasara there are Sada-Varga, Sapia Varga, Dasa Varga and Sorashn Varga. These have different terms, such as Sada Varga, Kimsukadi Varga (Kshetra, Hora, Drekkan, Turyamsa, Saptamsa, Navamsa, Dasamsa), Parijat Varga, Kimsukadi Varga & Sorasamsa & Sasthyamsa Varga.
   Of these Vargas, Navamsa Varga is most important and essential.  When planets are situated in their own Mooltrikona or their exalted houses or in their friendly houses they are considered to be strong and favourably disposed.  When a planet or lagna is situated in the rasi in which he is posited in birthchart they are considered to be strong.
When a planet is said to have aequired strength in a Varga ?
   Excepting hora and Kshetra a planet's Varga-bala (Strength) is to be judged in the following manner :
   (i) In any Varga if the planet is in a Kendra from hi position in the birthchart it is said to have acquired strength. Again if he is in a friendly house or Mooltrikona, Exalted house or his own house he will be taken as strong. Of course if he is in a Kendra position from the original place in the birth chart and at the same time in a friendly or mooltrikona houses etc. he will he very strong.
   (ii) If he is in a Kendra position from the place where he is posited in the birth chart but that Kendra rasi is his enemy's house, the planet in question loses his strength to some extent.
   (l/1) If a planet is ·posited in a house whose lord is in his house of exaltation, mooltrikona etc., the planet in question acquires so.me strength.
  (Iv) If a planet occupies the house of his debilitation in the birth chart but in Navamsa Chart he is in his exalted house then the planet acquires strength.

CHAPTER V
INDICATION OF BHAVAS

   While considering the merit or demerit of a house (henceforth we shall call it a bhava) it is the bhava not the rasi the most important factor. Na vamsa is next or equally important point. Hindu astrologers attach much importance in Navamsa Chart. They call it the life vivration of a planet or in other words liveliness of a planet is to be judged from a Navamsa Chart.
The First Bhava
   The first bhava indicates the health of the native, consti­ tutions and structure of the body, countenance, character, nature of the person, complexion, longivity etc.
   All these qualities as already said in previous chapter may be subjected to many changes by the influence of aspects and the position of planet or planets situated in the bhava and also due to position of the bhava-lord in any auspicious or inauspicious bhava or by conjunction with malefic or benefic planet. Let us take an example. If Vrhaspathi occupies Simba Rasi where lagna is posited and lagna and Vrhaspatbi receive no full aspect of any other planet or they are not in conjunction with any one, the reading may be summarized in the following manner.
   Colour of Simha Rasi is dark red, and colour of Vrhaspathi is gold-like yellow. In Navamsa chart Vrhaspatbi is in Karkata. If the lagna lord Ravi is not influenced by black-coloured planet such as Sani the native's complexion should be yellow and white mixed, slightly dark red hue may be mixed with yellow and white colour. He will be gopd looking, eyes are prominent, nature is temperate, he will keep good health etc.
   Again, if the lord of lagna is not well-disposed rather aspected by his enemy .Sani who is the lord of the 6th and 7th houses or Ravi is in conjunction with Sani or Rahu the native inspite of Vrhaspathi's position in lagna may not be keeping good health. The native may suffer from such ailments of Sani or Rahu or both and also of Ravi to some extent. Vrhaspathi's effect  on  lagna is no doubt good but he will not be able to

INDIO.AXION OF BH.AVAB	121
 protect the native all the time from suffering from ailments referred to above. Again Vrhaspathi's strenith is also of primary consideration. If Vrhaspathi is strong in Varga-charts specially in Navamsa Chart he (Vrhaspathi) will have definitely a favourable influence in matter of health of the native provided Lagnadhipathi (lagna-lord) is not seriously damaged. On the other hand if Lagnapathi Ravi is well-disposed or attached with Lagna or in a friendly house without being malefically influenced by any unfavourahle planet the native is sure to keep good health and shall be endo...·d with many virtues.

Position of the lord of the 1st houses in different bhavas and results thereof.
   1st house: If the lagnapathi is posited in lagna the health of the native is expected to be good, his physical structure is excellent and he becomes a liberal-minded man. If the Lagna­ pathi is a natural malefic and is situated in the 1st house the native shall not always be keeping good health or if the same lord occupies any other Kendra or is associated with Chandra ill health of the native is possible, but if he occupies in any Kona
{5th or 9th house) or !Ith house the native may keep good health. If the lagnapathi is weak or debilitated or combust or he is posited in any dusthana (6th, 8th or 12th house) the native will be lean and thin and sickly.
   If the Kendra and Kona houses are not occupied by any malefic and Vrhaspathi being the lord of lagna occupies I he 4th or 8th house the native lives upto JOO years and keeps his health free from any disease; he is happy and pious.
   Again, a powerful lord of lagna aspected by benefics but unaspected by malefics occupies a kendra position from lagna the native is blessed with long life and never meets an unnatural death.
   When lagnapathi Vrhaspathi or Sukra is situated in a kendra position the subject will become a rich man, is dear to the king and is blessed with long life.
   When lagnapathi aspected by benefic and occupies a moveable Rasi (sign) the native becomes a renowned man, beautiful to look at and luxurious.
When any one of Chandra, Budha, Vrhaspathi and Sukra is

122	HINDU BOIENOE OF XHE FUXUBE
posited in Lagna or in Kendra the native has an appearance of a king.
   If lagna is occupied by Rahu aspected by Chandra and "Gulika" is posited in Navamsa lagna birth of twin children is possible.
   if the lagna-lord is weak, debilitated or combust the native will become sickly, evil-minded, and infamous. When the same lord occupies the 12th place in the Na vamsa chart the native may roam about aimlessly and never enjoys peace of mind.
Lagnapatbi in the 2nd house :
   If the lord of lagna occupies the 2nd house (dhana house) with the lord of the 2nd the native may be wealthy and his treasury may be full of silver, gold, precious metals and stones. He will have peaceful family life, his attempts to prosper in life may be fruitful. But in the Navamsa 'chart if the lord of the 2nd house occupies any dusthana (6th, 8th or 12th place) from the rasi where the 2nd lord is posited in the birth chart the good effect will be much less.
The native may be sickly but pious.
Lagnapathi in the 3rd house :
   This is a good sign for the native to have the !st lord in the 3rd house in his birthchart, because the native shall be perse­ vering, peinstaking and a mighty man. His brothers and sisters will be prosperous. He will be endeared by men of both sexes.
   If the lagnadhipatbi occupies any dusthan from the lord of the 3rd house in the Navamsa chart the native may have enmity with his brothers.
Lagnapathi in the 4th house :
   The native shall have his own house, vehicle and lands. He will command respect from his friends and relatives. Acquain­ tance with learned men and formation of new friends of high social status will also be the effect due to the position of lagna­ lord in the 4th place. These good effects will be enhanced if the lord of the 4th house also is there in the 4th place from lagna. Relation with his mother, near relatives and friends will be vitiated if the lagnapathi is in any dusthan in the Navamsa Chart from the 4th lord.  Further, he may sustain monetary loss, may be involved in accident and litigation.  Effects of similar  nature

INDICATION OF BHAVAS	123
may be predicted if the 4th house is occupied by any lord of dusthanas or any lord of dusthan is conjoined with lagnapathi and lord of the house.
Lagoapathi in the 5th house :
   If the strong lagna-lord occupies the 5th house and there is equally strong 5th lord in the same place the native shall be endowed with many qualities and he shall be a learned and intelligent man. He will earn the grace of the king (Government of his time), may be a minister, ambassador, or a high Government official. He may not be quite hap;,y about his sons. This is a yoga of political prosperity.
   Th good effect may be nullified and quite opposite result may be predicted if in the 5th house there is any planet owning dusthana or in the Navamsa chart the lagnapathi occupies 6th, 8th or 12th house from the rasi held by the 6th lord.
Lagoapathi in the 6th house :
   If the lagnalord alone is posited in the 6th house the native shall vanquish his enemies, he will be able to win over all obstacles, will be a respectable man and rich. But if the 6th lord is there with lagnalord or lord of lagna receives the aspect of lord of 6th, 8th or 12th house, the native shall suffer from many ailments, enmity with cousins, failure in all undertakings, poverty etc. But the salient point is that if the 6th lord is debilitated and lagnalord is strong favourable result may be predicted.
Lagnapathi in the 7th.house :
   If the 7th house is a movable rasi and lagnapathi is posited there along with 7th lord the native will go on pilgrimage and also travel over many distant countries, if the 7th house falls in a common rasi he will undertake journies to foreign countries.
   If lagnadhipathi is stronger than 7th lord or both of. them are equally strong the native will be profitted by such journey and if lagnapathi is weaker than the 7th lord the journey will be profitless.
It is a very unfavourable yoga when lagnapathi occupies any
dusthana from the 7th lord in Navamsa chart. In such case the native becomes very poor, has no means of livelihood, he will be defamed and shall always quarrel with his wife. Lagnadhipathi in the 7th house may indicate premature death of wife or husband as the case may be.

124	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
Lagnapathi in the 8th house :
   When the lord of lagna is in the 8th house it is a very unfavourable yoga, there is no doubt about it.  The native may be plunged in heavy debt, suffer from misery and poverty, he is an evil-minded man and never thinks of honest things. This result will worsen if lagnapathi is in conjunction with 8th lord. But unfavourable result may be much minimised iflagnapathi is strong and 8th lord is weak. In any case the native will indulge in sinful acts.
Lagnapathi in the 9th house :
   The native will be a righteous man, popular, devoted to father, elders and God. These favourable results will be much enhanced if the lord of lagna is in conjunction with 9th lord. The father of the native will have prosperous time during the dasa-antardasa of Lagnapathi and bhagyapathi (9th lord). When both the lords or at least either of them is strong on account .,f their positions in the house of exaltation or Swakshetra (own house) or acquire strength in Vargas there is possibility of influx of much wealth.
   If in the Navamsa chart lagnapathi occupies any dusthana from the 9th lord or vice versa the native may be involved in litigation with regard to ancestral property.
   Generally lagnapathi in the 9th house makes the native a man of aesthetic sense, he will be an intelligent, efficient and lucky man.
Lagnapathi in the 10th house :
   The native shall be prosperous, wield respect and honour from men of high circles, he shall have good administrative service provided the lord of lagna is powerful and conjoins with equally powerful 10th lord. His parents will be happy and the native also will do his best to please them (parents).
Lord of Iagna in the 11th house :
   If the native is a businessman there will be much gain through business, he will be benefitted through his elder brother's effort. If he is an officer in any institution during the dasa and antardasa of lagnapathi and lord of the 11th house the native will earn good money provided both the lords are strong and are situated in ihe 11th. If in the Navamsa chart the !agna lord and lord of the 11th house are posited in dusthana from each other the result will be unfavourable.

INDICATION OF BHAVAS	125
Lagnapathi ln the 12th house :
   If lagnapathi along with the 12th lord occupy 12th house the native shall be plunged in debt, he shaU be a very poor man and shall pass his days in distress. He shall be a man of haughty temperament and a man of loose morals.
Dhana bhava ( or the 2nd house )
   Dhana bhava signifies Financial Prosperity, wealth (parti­ cularly accumulated wealth), Family, relatives, speech, mouth, tongue, eyes (vision).
   Initial rules in judging a horoscope are also to be applied at the time of analysing the dhana bhava.
   It is needless to repeat here that in dealing with all houses the same rules as said before are applicable. First of all (I) the house, (2) its lord, (3) aspect on the house or/and its lord, association  with  them,  (4)  planets  occupying  the  house.
(5) position of natural karaka (indicator) etc. The same rules are to be considered in Navamsa chart also.
   There are a few planets that give unfavourable result with regard to dhana bhava. They are Ravi, Mangal primarily and Sani and Rahn or Ketu secondarily. Besides the lords of dusthanas (6th, 8th and 12th) when placed in dhana bhava will not give good result even if they are naturally friendly to the lord of the 2nd, and/or their aspect on the 2nd bhava is not beneficial to dbana bhava. But waning moon or malefic planets (except Ravi and Mangal) if they are wealth-giving planets in a birth chart·will help increase the native's wealth. Planets occupying or upecting the 2nd house if predominently indicator of wealth in a chart will give wealth to the native in their dasa and antardasas. So also the dhanpathi's effect.  If the lord of the 2nd house is posited in his own house, in his house of exalta­ tion, in his friend's house or gains 'Gapuramsa' Varga (if a planet gains 4 Vargas of one planet it is called 'Gapuramsa' Varga) or if the 2nd lord is posited in Kendra or Kona house from lagna the native becomes rich and passes his days cheerfully.
   If the 2nd house is occupied by an exalted planet or the same occupant is in his own or mooltrikona house and at the same time the 2nd lord acquires strength in Vargas the native becomes sweet tongued and his words will be infallible.

126	HINDU SOIENOE OF THE FUTURE
   If the lord of the 2nd and 9th houses being the one and the same planet is posited in the 2nd house and also is aspected by a benefic his words also may be infallible.
   If the 2nd lord conjoined with or aspected by benefic occupies Kendra or Kona house the native becomes pious, orator and protect or maintains relatives.
   If the 2nd lord is situated in highest exalted point, either conjoined with or is aspected by Vrhaspathi and is posited in Kendra or Kona house from lagna the native becomes a world famous persJn.
Eye-disease
Eye sight (vision) is to be judged from the 2nd house.
   (1) If the lord of the 2nd house in conjunction with lagna lord is placed in any dusthana there is possibility of complete loss of eyesight.
   (2) If the 2nd lord, Sukra, and Chandra together occupy lagna there is possibility of night blindness.
   (3) !f the lords of the 2nd house and lagna togethor conjoined with Ravi and Sukra occupy any dusthan the native may be blind since his birth.
   (4) When Mangat aspected by a malefic occupies the 12th house from lagna loss of left eye sight is indicated, Similarly when Ravi aspected by a malefic is situated in the 12th from lagna loss of sight of right eye is indicated.
   (5) If the lords of lagna and of the 2nd house in conjunction with Sukra are posited in any of the dusthanas the native may be squint-eyed.
Dumbness
Power of speech is judged from the 2nd house and its lord.
   (I) If the lord of the 2nd combines with Budha, and Rahu or Ketu or the lord of the rasi where Rahu is posited owns the 2nd house and is situated in the 6th place from lagna the native may lose his power of speech during the dasa•antardasa of the 2nd lord.
   (2) The 2nd lord being in conjunction with Vrhaspathi if placed in the 8th place from lagna the native may be a dumb.
   (3) If the 9th Navamsa ofKarkata, Vrscika or Mina Rasi is afflicted by a maleac and Chandra in Vrsa Rasi is aspected also by a malefic planet the native may be a dumb, but instead of

INDIOATION 01' BHAVAS	12?
malefic aspect on Chandra if he is aspected by a benefic the native restores his speaking power after 5 years of age.
   (4) If the 6th lord Budha aspected by a malefic occupies either Karkata, Vrscika or Mina, or, if said Budha {the lord of the 6th house) being in coujunction with Mangal is aspected by a naturally unfavourable planet and occupies lagna the native will be dumb, he can only make a queer sound of "Go-Go".
   (5) If the Muka-yogakaraka (the planet that makes a man dumb)is placed in any dusthana but the place is planet's own house, or house of exaltation the result will not be unfavourable.
Indication of disease from the second house :
{I)  The native may be attacked with chronic dysentery if the
2nd house is occupied by Rahu or Sani.
  (2) If there are Chandra and Rahu in the 2nd house the native may be suceptible to cold and also he may be attacked with typhoid fever.
   (3) If Sukra or Mangal occupies the 2nd or 12th house thf' subject may be attacked with disease of the ear.
   (4) If Chandra is associated with his enemy or is placed in the 2nd place which is the house of his enemy there is danger from water.
   ( Ordinarily Chandra has no enemy , here enemy mcanl tcmpor'lry enemy ).
The Yoga that makes a man a liar :
If the lord of the second house is conjoined with a  naturally
unfavourable planet and another malefic occupies the 2nd house the native is a habitual liar and suffers from morbid affection of the nervous system.
The Yop that makes a man rich :
If the lagna, dhana and Ayasthan (1I th  house) arc  occupied
by their respective lords the native becomes rich,
   Our readcn may get general idea of 'dhana' yoga if they remember the following combination of planets or relation among those planets :
   (1) Any two of the following seven bhavas viz., lagoa, 2nd, 4th, 5th, 9th, 10th and 11th, if related to one another either by combination, aspect or exchance of places, may confer wealth to the native. Permutation and combination of these bhava lords will be the guiding factor to determine the dhana yoga.

130	HINDU SOll!NCB OP THE PUTUBE
dhana karaka (wealth giving planet) Vrhaspatbi does not aspect the dhanasthan (i.e. 2n house) even the specially brilliant dhana yoga does not yield desired result.

Daridra yoga (Poverty)
The same theory as noted above is applica le in determining
'Daridra Yoga'.
  That is, if the plar.ets that form dhana yoga are malefic due to <heir positions in un avourable houses or aspect of or conjun­ ction wirh rr.alefic pbncts the native may suffer from poverty. This is a general rule. The malefic effect may be modified or lessened owing to :,.;pect of or asso iation with favourable planets. But there are special 'daridra' yoga (yoga of poverty) which are considered to be aimost infallible.
   (I) If Ravi, Sukra and S.ini are cr,mbined together even a king may be a p1tuper.  llut if Ravi is posited in Mesa Rasi and is associated with Budh:, and is aspectcd by Vrhaspathi the native is expected te, be rich.
(2) Combination of Clundra, Mangal, Sukra and Sani in any
•ign (i.e. Ras;) will definitely result in poverty.
   (3) When R"vi ,1,i<l S;,ni together occupy the 2nd place from lagna the subject suli'crs from loss of money and also monetary stringency is possible, but if these planets are aspected by a benefic planet unfavourable result should not be predicted.
(4) If there is no pl met ID he 10th house from lagna, the
l hh  !louse from  !'tc,vi :ind i:i the 8th house from Chandra the
na1ive beco:nes a poor mun. This ;s a very unfavourable yop.
   (5) If the 4 Kendras i.e. lagna, 4th, 7th and 10th are occupied by malefic planets :he native suffers from poverty till his death.
   (6) If there is no planet excepting Ravi in 2nd and 12th places from Che.ndra, and Chandra and Kendra positioli& donot receive aspect of any benefic pla::iet it is 'Kemadrooma' yoga. This is a sign of poverty and the r.ative passes his days tilrough many vicissitudes of life. If Chandra is aspected by Vrhaspathi the b:td effect of Kemadrooma yoga is much minimized.
(7) Mang l i:> tl,c . nd place from lagna is said to be very
·,mfa ,ourable ven though he is a yogakaraka planet, (Tn case of K1r!:ata & Simhc lagn,s Mangal is called a yoga-karnka planet).

INDIOATION OF IlHAV ,s	131
   (8) Ravi, Mangal and Sani, are said to be naturally very unfavourable planets, their lndia11 equivalent term is 'Krura' ( cruel or mischievous ) planets. If these kru•a planets occupy the 2nd place without being aspected by any naturally benefic planets and at the same time if they are com bust, debilitated or conjoined with any lord of dusthan the native has no m ans of livelihood and suffers from extreme poverty.
   (9) If the benefic planets occupy any dusthan and malefic planets are situated in kendra or kona house the native anyhow is able to manage his two meals but it is a great predicament for bim to arrange his clothing.

Results of the lord of the second house qccupying different bhavas ( houses )
  (1) In Lagna-the native may be a businessman and rich, but he will be miserly, greedy, passionate and lacks polite manners and may hate his own kith and kin.
   But the native will earn money by his own effort, inte1ligence or learning.  If the 2nd lord being in Lagoa joins with the lord of luck (9th house) or the Sun the s,ibject may get property and wealth by inheritance.
(2) In the 2nd place-The  native  may  be  wealthy  and
enterprising; he feels pro,id for nis wealth. He may marry twice or thrice and even then he remains childless.
The native cannot take delicious or nutritious food if the 2ni
lord is afflicted by malefic planets.  Again his  hildren  may  be
,ickly and he is unhappy in his conjugal life.
  (3) In the 3rd plllce-The native shall be brave, conscientious but obstinate, well-manner< i but he may be a mau of immoral character and addicted lo lux.uries. If the 2nd lord in the third house is strong and is aspected by or conjoined with benetlcial planets his brothers or sisters may be of great help to the native and bis artistic faculties, viz., art of music or dancing may be developed and he may ' e profited thereby.
   (4) In the 4th house-Tue subject will be rich, kind-hearted and truthful ; be may be blessed with long life.  If the 2n lord is a na1'.1rally malefic planet without receiving any aspect of a favourable planet the mother of the native may fall badly ill during the dasa-antardasa of the 2nd lord.

132	HINDU 801ENO& OP THl! PUTUBB

   Again, if the 2nd lord is fortified by the a,pect of or conjunction with a benefic planet the native may earn good amount of money through agricultural pursuit or automobile business. Further he may be benefited by maternal relatives and may inherit his father's property.
  If the 4th house or its lord along with :be lord of the 2nd is afflicted, the native shall have to sustain monetary loss heavily.
(5) In the 5th house-If the 2nd lord in the fifth house is well­
fortified there is a chance of unexpected gain or wealth through lotteries or favour of the ruler of the land. The subject may be doing good works no doubt but his miserly babit may be a talk of the day, because he will be reluctant to spend the least amount of money for his house-hold affairs.  Even he shall not be readily agreeable to spend anything for maintenance or education or his children. His children may be honest and lucky, the native may be sensual and lack manners due to affliction of the 2nd lord in the 5th house.
   (6) In the 6th house-The subject may acquire wealth throui;h unfair means such as black marketing or other dece11ful work,.. For his own financial gain he may create misunderstanding an<i trouble between his friends and relatives.
  If the 2nd lord com oines with the lord of the 6th house and both of them are strong, suspicious dealings with friends and relatives may be anticipated and he may be accused of forgeries and perjuries or hreach of trust.
   If the 6th lord is a natural benefic the native may sustain los• of money due to activities of enemies but the enemies will be subdued.
   (7) In the 7th house--Both the husband and wife may be sensual, particularly the wife who may be a person of questionable moral character. When the lord of the 2nd associated with the 7th lord is posited in the 7th house and both the planets-parti­ cularly the 7th lord, are strong the native may earn money through foreign sources. He will be a business man and shall visit many foreign countries to promote his business.
When the rasi or Navamsa held by the 2nd lord happens to
be a feminine one the native will be benefited by a woman.
   (8) In the 8th house-If the 2nd lord iSiituated in the 8th there l s!idl! or :'·J cJ:i. .;e ef f:lp :?!i., in coci'..lgli lifo. Relation with

INDIOA'.r!ON OP JlHAVAS	133
his elder brothers or sisters are not cordial. The native will inherit ancestral property, or wealth from some other source; he will have no earning and ultimately accumulated wealth or property may be squandered.
   If the 2nd lord is strong there is a chance of fair earning but loss of money also is equally possible.
   (9) In the 9th house-If the 2nd lord is in the 9th house the subject will be efficient, skilful, and lucky; he will be sickly in young age but will maintain good health afterwards. This yoga is very favourable one, the native shall earn money through different sources and shall inherit wealth or property.
   (10) In the 10th house-When the 2nd lord is associated with the 10th house the native shall he held in high esteem by almost all classes of men, even his superiors and elders shall show respact to him. He will be a learned man, and shall earn fairly well by dint of his own effort. He may be childless, the result depends on the character and strength of the 5th house and its lord.
   (11) In the 11th house-The native may be a hotelkeeper or a banker or moneylender. Health in his childhood will not be good, he will earn huge money through the business stated above
but he will be unscrupulous.
  (12) In the 12th house-This is not a good sign to have the lord of tbe 2nd posited in the 12th house. The native may be extravagant or may be bound to spend much more than his income and may be involved in debt.
   There are favourable results too. He becomes a very respect­ able man and may hold a Governmental post. He is not happy with his elder brother and eldest son.
The Third House
   The third house rules brothers, sisters and relatives in general. It signifies medicine, food specially fruits, courage, throat, ears, father's death. While judging !he third  house the following factors should be looked into ,iz ..
{a) The-strength or otherwise of the bbava and its lord, (bl Planets occupying the bhava,
(c) Natural indicator of the third bhava.
   Besides general rules to assess the merit or demerit of a bhava or its lord are to be applied which ,. ill help the reader, arrive at a correct decision.

134	HINDU SG!BNCE OF' THE FUTURE

   Third house denotes exclusively brothers and sisters. So, sta dard and authoritative books on astrology deal with brothers aod sisters first and subsequently other matters are taken into consideratio'.l.
   I. If the third house is occupied by very malefic planets or the lord of the •hird house or the Karaka planet {viz., Mangat) is associated with ver} unfavourable planet the native loses his brother or sister in his/her childhood.
   2. If Karaka planet Mangat occupies his debilitated house either in birtJ-, or Na vamsa Chart or Mangal is in malefic sasthyamsa ( lo part of a Rasi-See Varga charts) or conjoined with a malefic the birth of brothers or sisters is possible only tt> m'ot with early death.
   SarvarthacMntamony an authoritative book on astrology says that if the Karaka planet Mangal becomes extremely malefic as stated above th bir•h of a still-born brother is certain. The readers must be very careful in applying this rule before giving thei: judgment. Because it was found in some cases that aspect of a favourable planet on Mangat saved one or two brothers of the natives inspite of their serious illness. Let u• give an instance :-In case of dhanu lagna third house is occupied by Sani, Ravi, Budha and Ketu, and Mangal is in the 11th houae(Tula Rasi) with 8th lord Chandra who is a natural papa. Chandra and Mangat are aspected by lagna-lord Vrhaspathi who io situated iu the 5th house.
   The third lord Seni is combust, between two malefic Ravi and Budha, aspected by Rahu. Mangat is with 8th lord Chandra but aspected by favour&bie Vrbaspathi.
   The younger and elder sisters of the native died very early, the youngest brot:1er though '°nously ill at theage of 5 years. survived and still alive. This is only possible as Mangat is aspe.;ted by Vrhaspathi and Saci is e"alted in Navamsa chart. So. correct decision about the third house and its lord depends on a carefui examinition of mar..y :-:rnre thing8.
   (3) If th lord of the 3rd hou,e .,nd Karaka planet are posi,ed in tne 3th house from ,agna ;in<i are aspected by malefic•, early death of brothers and sisters may be ,.nticipated. If that Stb. house is owned by a malefic and the lord l'i.ereof is associated

lNDIOATlON OF BHAVAS	1115
with an unfav,urable planet early dea!I, of b,others and sisters
is more certain.
A  few yogas  that indicate early death of bt,>thers and
sisters :
   (a) The third house is associated with or aspected by a malefic and the lord of the 3rd house is hemmed in between two malefics.
   (b) The 3rd lord will be unfavourable due to above reasons and his po•ition in his debilitated house in Navamsa, at the same time no benefic will cast his aspect on the 3rd house or its lord.
   (c) The Navamsa lord of the 3rd lord is combust and in the 8th house and debilitated.
   (d) The third lord is joined with Sani or Mandi, or debi­ litated and i• aspected by a malefic.
   (e) The lord of the third house is posited in the 3rd. is aspected by a malefic or is in malefic Sastyemsa.
   (f) The lord of the 3rd house is in the 8th place and his Navamsa lord occupies the house of a very malefic planet.
   (g) The Navamsa lord of the lord of Navamsa of tbe 3rd lord is in his debilitated or inimical house.
   4. . The  third lord or Karaka planet Mangal if posited in any dusthan or is associated with and aspected by a malefic will produce bad effects so far death of brothers and sisters are concerned though the occupy their houses of exaltation.
   5. The yogas that cont'er the native being blessed with brothers and sisters :
   (a) The 3rd house is associated with and aspected by benefic planet and the 3rd lord is strong.
   (b) The Karaka planet Mangal being placed in the 3rd house and powerful, will give good result in respect of brothers and sisters if at the same time Mangat is in conjunction with or is aspected by a ben fic.
   (c) The lord of the 3rd house, the Karaka of the 3rd bhava ( Mangal, naturally governs the 3rd bhava ) if posited in their houses of exaltation, in their own or friendly houses or in their own Vargas in Navamsa Chart.
(d) The 3rd  lord  is a natural benefic and acquires Gopur

136	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUl'lJRE
varga and Mangal the ruler of the 3rd bhava ( i.e. K.araka of the 3rd bhava ) also is in Simhasan varga.
   If a planet acquires 4 vargas of his own i, said to be in 'Gopur' varga and when a planet in 5 vargas of hie own is said to be in 'Simhasan' varga.
   6. Affinity with brothers and sisterS-When tile 1agnadhi­ patni ( lord of lagna ) and the lord of the 3rd house an  friendly to each other relation with brothers and sisters will be c,,rdial. If however, they are inimical to each other there is least char ;e of sweet relation between the natiw and his brothers and si••ers.
7. The 3rd lord and character of the nathe :
   (a) If the 3rd lord being in conjunction with a benefic is placed in a favourable Navamsa the native becomes sober and temperate.
(bl  The  lord  of  Navamsa  of  the  lord of the 3rd house if
 ,laced in his own or exalted house in Navamsa chart, the native will be steady in all his endeavours, he will be an intelligent warrior and experienced diplomat.
   (cl When the 3rd lord acquires Simhasan, Gopur or Pii.riibata varga ( 6 vargas of his own ) and is aspected by or conjoined with benefic the native becomes a veteran first rate warrior.
   (d) (i)	When the :,rd lord is associated with Ravi the native becomes gentle-natured and calm.
   (ii) When 3rd lord is associated with Chandra. the native becomes steady in all his endeavours.
(iii) When he is conjoined with Sani he will he fatuous.
   (iv) When he is associated with Mangal the native will be a man of bad te'llper.
(,j	When he i• in conjunction with Budha the native will be
pious.
   (vi) When he is joined with Vrhaspathi he will be conversant in all shastras, a great scholar and sober.
   (vii) When the 3rd lord is conjoined with Sukra the subject will be higbly libidinous.
   (viii) If the •am iord is in conjunction with Rahu or Ketu the na:ive outwardly appears to be strong-minded but inwardly a weak man.

JNDIOATION OF' BHAVAS	13?
   8. Indication of diseases and other unfavourable results from tlle position of 3rd lord :
   (a) If Vrhaspathi with the rd lord is posited in lagna, danger from four-footed animal particularly cows may be anticipated, and if the lagna-rasi is a watery sign, danger from water also may be apprehended.
(b) If the 3rd lord is associated with Rahu or with the lord
of the sign where Rahu is posited there is danger from snake.
   (c) If the 3rd lord being in his house of debilitation is posited in the 6th house an4 also is aspecred by a malefic or he is combust the native may be poisoned by somebody or accidentally he takes any poisonous drug etc.
   (d) The native suffers from any kind of disease in throat if the 3rd house is occupied by malefic planet particularly if Gulika ( or Mandi ) is there in the third house along with other malefics the disease in throat is a strong and sure possibility.
   (e) If the 3rd house is occupied by Sani, an.: Gu!ika also is there the native shall be attacked with rheumatism.
   (/) The lord of Navamsa of the lord of the sign where the 3rd lord is posited if placed in Kendra and conjoined with and aspected by malefic and there is no aspect of a benefic cast on the same Navamsa lord the native may be attacked with diseases in Ear.
Positions of the lord of the third house in different bhavas and results thereof.
I.  In the 1st house-The native  earns money  by his  own
effort and becomes rich ; he is illiterate, lean and thin, brave,
•ickly and serves others.
   When the third lord is stronl! the native becomes a good actor and makes good name as a musician and dancer.
   2. In the 2nd bouse--The native shall be morally depraved, unscrupu'ryus and a mean-minded person ; generally he i• unhappy.
   3. In the 3rd house-The third lord in the 3rd house is a favourable yoga. The native becomes brave, wealthy an<i b>;'PY• He shall always be adored by his frienC:s and relatives.
4. In the 4th house-The wife of the native shall be a mean
and cruel-hearted person ; he himself •viii be rich and learned.

138	IDKDU 80I);NOP: 01' THP: FUTURE

   5. In the 5th house-If the3rd lord is well-fortified in the fifth house the native's relation with his brothers will be cordial and he will be benefited by them but he will not be happy about children. As a Government Servant he shall prove his efficiency and shall hold very high position.
   6. In the 6th bouse-Native's brothers may be very rich, but he hates them, his enemies shall give constant trouble. His relation with his maternal uncles will not be cordial but he will be dear to his maternal aunt•.
   When the 3rd lord is well-fortified in lite 6th hous•, one of his brothers shall be a successful physician and another an army officer. If again both the 3rd and 6th lords join together in the 6th house the native may he a good sportsman and athlet, If these two lords are afflicted the native ahall suffer from various kinds of diseases and enemies will give him trouble every now and then.
   7. In the 7th house-The native may incur displ.,asures of rulers and may be punished. If the 3rd lord is very much afflicted the native may eve:1 be sentenced to death. Of course if lagna and the 8th lord are well-fortified there may not bo capital punishment.
   If the 3rd lord is well-disposed in the 7th, the native's brother or brothers may live in a foreign country and will help the native.
   The afflicted 3rd lord in the '7th house doe• not make a person morally strong unless the lord or the 9th house { called house of religion) and also the lagna-lord are strong and well-disposed. If these two lords are not well-fortified and the 3rd lord i• unfavourable the native may hanker after other's wife.
   8. In the 8th house-The 3rd lord in the 8th house is an unfortunate yoga with regard to one's health. The n,itive may be attacked with serious and dangerous diseases. The native may be imolved in a criminal case; this yoga denotes unhappy conjugal life and bad luck all through his life until and unless the well-disp sition of the lords of 9th and 10th houses ore assured in the birth chart.
9. In the 9th house-Indication of  favourable  lucJ.  afte,
marriage. The native may be benefited by his brothers. His father will be cynic and a cruel-hearted man.  The native may have

INDICATION OF BHAVA5	139
strained relation with his father if the 3rd lord is afflicted.  H may undertake long journey.
   10. In the 10th house-The 'lative's wife will be quarrelsome, cruel-hearted and unfaithful. He himself will be rich, happy and intelligent and his brothers will shine well in their vocational career and will be of great help to the native.
   11. In the 11th house-If the 3rd lcrd is well-disposed in the 11th house the native may earn good money by his own effort and lead a decent life. If the 3rd lord is afflicted he becomes vindictive, may be serving others or dependant on others, and is liable to suffer from many diseases.
   12. Io the 12th house-The native gets fortune through his wife but he is to pass. through many ups and downs. His father is a cruel-hearted man, and the younger brother of the native will be a dangerous fellow and for his fault the native may sustain heavy loss of money.
These unfavourable results may be modified if the 3rd lord 1s
strong in Navamsa Chart, aspected by favourable planets.

The Fourth House
   The 4th house signifies mother, education, mental condition, vellicles, house, general happiness, prosperity, property-parti­ cularly immovable property.  In determining the student's merit in academic career 4th house and its lord play an important role though the disposition of the 5th and 10th lords should not be overlooked. The Karakas of the 4th bhava are Vrhaspath i, Sukra and Bud ha of which Vrhaspathi stands for learning and wisdom, and Sukra and Budha for such education that helps the man enjoy material happiness. So, in considering the academic success of a native the Karaka planet's disposition aiso is to be tak,en into account.
   If the lagoadhipathi is not well-fortified simply favourable disposition of Karaka planets and of the 4th lord cannot give brilliant result in respect of university education.
   (a) If the 4th lord is favourably posited either in the 4th or in any other favourable house and the favourable planets are situated in any dusthan the native sllall not be altogether deprived of good result expected from the 4th house, though the good result wi'l be lessened to some extent.

140	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
   On the other hand occupation of malefic planets or of lords of dusthanas in the 4th may mar the tranquillity of the mind and other malefic effects regarding the 4th house are possible.
   (b) If the 4th house and its lord, favourable planets and strong Karaka planets are situated in the 4th place, or those benefic planets cast their aspect on the 4th house or its lord, or the 4th lord joins those favourable plands the native shall be highly educated, modest, disciplined and intelligent.
   (c) The native cannot do well in his educational career, and he cannot be a man of sharp intellect if the 4th house and its lord are afflicted owing to aspect, or association of malefic planets or the position of 4th lord in any dusthana.
   (d) Sukra denotes wife, Chandra mother, and Ravi father. Again when birth is at day time Sukra governs mother and Chandra governs mother when birth is at night.
   [ The planet that attains maximum degree is called Atma­ karaka-ruling planet ( if Rahu attains minimum degree he i.a called Atmakaraka ), the planet whose degree is second to the first one is called Amatyakaraka. In this manner Bhatrikaraka, Matrikaraka, Putrakaraka. Jnatikaraka and Jayakaraka planets are determined. In case of Rahu being Atmakaraka, Amatya­ karaka planet will be one who has maximum degree among other six planets. ]
Concerning Mother's death
(1) Subtract Ravi's sphuta from Chandra-sphuta.
   The result will be some rasi, degree, and Kala or Minute; when the transit (Gochar) Sani or Vrhaspathi will pass over that rasi and amsa or on the 5th or 9th rasi and amsa from the newly found rasi and a111sa, the death of the mother may be predicted.
   (2) Subtract the rasi and amsa of Ra vi from the rasi and amsa of the 8th lord from Chandra, when transit Sani or Ravi passes over that newly.found rasi and amsa, mother's death may be apprehended.
Let us cite an example :
   In the first birth chart ( See Chapter I )-Method No. 2 Sukra denotes mother as the native is born at day time. Hence, Sukra's sphuta•··!le-22°.I l'

Minus Ravi's
Result

0-16-18'
11-5-53

INDICATION OF BHAVAS	Hl
  So, when transit Sani or Vrhaspathi will passover the aforesaid rasi and amsa the death of the mother may be anticipated. The 5th house from this newly found rasi and amsa is 4-5'-53' and 9tlt rasi is 8•-5"-53', when Sani or Vrhaspathi will pass over any of these rasis, the death of the mother may be predicted.
   Astrologers must be cautious in predicting the period of death of any person. Because, Death can not overtake a person before his turn to leave this mortal world comes. In such cases, when astrologers see that the person will live some years more they will predict illness of that person during the transition of Sani or Vrhaspathi over that newly found rasi and amsa.
Nature of disease of mother
  (a) Powerful Ravi and Mangat when posited in the 4th house the mother of the native may suffer from diseases due to faulty secretion of bile and she may also be attacked with carbuncle or tumour etc.
   There may be a scar on the right side of the native's body and he can not maintain cordial relation with his friends. These results are outcome of the positions of Ravi and Mangat in tne 4th hou,e.
(b) If the 4th house is occupied by either Sani or Rahu  the
mother of the native may suffer from morbid affection of the nervous system or she may fall seriously ill owing to application of any ki.nd of poisonous drug or she may be involved into an accident from fall on any spacious stone.
   (c) If Chandra being associated with Sani or Rahu is posited in the 4th house the mother of the native becomes sickly.
                  Longivity of the mother Fall Ille or Purnayu :-
(a) When the 4th house and  M,trikaraka  planet  are
associated with favourable planet and the 4th lord is powerful. (bl  Powerful Chandra  being  in  favourable  Navamsa  i•
aspected by Sukra or Budha and occupies any of the 4 Keodras or that Chandra will be posited in the favourable rasi from the
ith house.
   (c) The lord of Navamsa of lagoa-Navamsa-lord whee, associated with tb.e Sukhapathi ( 4tb. lord ) and is posited in a Kendra from lagaa or in any Kendra from the oon.

142	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE

The yoga ·that confers happiness
   (a) When powerful lord of the 9th house is associated with Sukra and occupies the 4th hou,e the native enjoys happiness till his death.
   (b1 When Vrhaspa,hi is comparatively more powerful than lagnadhi:,athi a!ld is in conjunction with favourable planets or is posited behveen two benefic planets, at the same time he occupies the 4th house the native becomes a leader of the people and enjoys happiness.
   (c) Vrhaspathi's aspect on the 4th lord, and when he is posited in ti10 7th piece, or 7th place is occupied by any other benefic planet or Budha being in the 7th house is posited between benefic planets.
This yoga makes a man happy and a leader of the :,eople,
   (d) The 4th lord Vrhaspathi acquiring 'Gopuramsa' and the 2nd, 10th and 11th houses are occupied by planets the native leads a very happy life.

The yogas that confer unhappiness
   (a) The 4th lord joined with malefie planets and posited in m,Jefic Navamsa and the 2nd, 4th an<\ 5th places are associated with debilitated planets. Under t'his yoga the native lives in distress and is very unhappy.
   (b) When the 4th lord associated with Ravi and Mangat is in malefic Navamsa and is not aspected by any benefic planet the native lives in great distress.

Ownership of Vehicles
(a) When powerful Sukra and full moon occupy Kendra or
Kona houses the native commands many conveyances.
   (b) When the lord, of the Kendra where the powerful 4th lord is situated occupies lagna or there is exchange of houses between 10th and 11th lords the native becomes prosperous and possesses many conveyances.
(c) If the 4:h lord associated with Chandra, Vrhaspathi and
Sukra is s;tuated in lagna and these three planets ( Chandra, Vrhaspathi and Sukra) are not weak or malefic in any way, the native owns three kinds of conveyances.

INDICATION 01' BBAVAS	143

Ownership of houses
   (a) The 11th house is occupied by powerful benefic, and lords of lagna und the 4th house are very strong, or the 4th lord acquires 'Gopur' or 'Simhasan' Varga the native owns a palatial building.
   (b) If the lord of lagna is in the 4th and the 4th lord is in lagna ( i.e. when there is exchange of houses between them ) the native rnay build a house of his own very easily.
   (c) If the 4th place falls in a movable sign and the 4th lord and Karaka planet too are posited in movable sign ( or Rasi} the native builds houses in many places. Under this yoga if the lords of the 2nd, I Ith and 4th houses are placed in Kendra or Kona places all the buildings referred to above are good and well-builu
(d) II the powerful 4th and 10th lords are situated in Kendra
or Kona houses the native shall own beautiful buildings.
Loss of houses
   (a) If the inimical planet of lagnadbipatbi occupies lagna there is possibility of loss of house in his ( Enemy's ) dasa and antardasa.
   (b) The l!asa-antardasa of inimical planet of the 4th lord may be the cause of destruction of houses and death of friends.
   If that dasa-lbrd happens to be Sani, Mangal or Gulika the native shall have to suffer from serious type of worries and anxieties.
Concerning possession of landed property
   (a) 4th lord is in the 10th and 10th lord in the 4th and Mangal attains full strength; under this yoga the native possesses many landed properties.
   (b) If the 4th lord acquires Gopur varga and is posited in the 5th place from lagna the acquisition of many landed properties may be predicted.
   (c) Navamsa lord of the lord of the sign where the 4th lord ia situated may help the native's brother acquire much wealth and landed property if that Navamsa lord, is aspected by a friendly planet.
   (dj If the lord of the 7th and Jii)akaraka planet are situated in the 4th house and  the 4th lord is in the 7th and they are

lH	JIUIDU SOIBNOE OF' THE FUTURE

friendly to each other, acquisition of wealth through wife is. poo•ibk.
Acquisition of wealth buried underground
(a) If the lords of the 2nd and 11th houses are in the 4th,
or
   (b) If the powerful lord of the 4th is posited in the 9th house owned by a benefic and also 4th lord is associated with benellc planets,
or
(c) If  the  powerful  lord  of the  house, associated with a
benefic is placed in the 4th house owned by benefic planets,
or
   (d) If the lord of the 2nd house being in conjunction with tbe 4th lord is conjoined with a benefic and also is placed in the 9th place from a favourable planet.
   The owners of birtbcharcs having been endowed with any of the above yogas may acquire wealth buried under the earth.
A few special yogas
   (a) If the 4th house iaoccupied by Sani with Chandra in h.ia house of exaltation and Vrhaspathi aspects both Chandra and Sani the native's mother dies early ; he will receive western education and will be an author at his early age.
   (b) If the 3rd house is occupied by Budha, the 4th lord is well-disposed, the native will own splendid mansions.
   (c) If the 4th house is associated with Sani, Rahu or Ket11 the native will be dishonest and may ind11lge in fraudulent schemes.

Position of tbe lord of the fo11rtb house in differeai
IJhBTU ud results thereof
   I. In the 1st house-The native becomes highly  educated but is afraid of •peaking in public meetings or assemblies. He may be deprived of ancestral property.
   2. In the 2nd hons1>-Tbe person will be very fortunate, courageous and happy. He will have chance of inheriting property from maternal grandfather.
  3. In the 3rd house-The native will be a man of very poor ealib, gen rous and a man of character.  He will be rich  by

INDIOATION OF BHAVAS	145

dint of his own effort and intelligence ; may suffer very badly due to activities of step-mother and step-brother.
4. In the 4th house-The person  will  be rich, respected and
happy. He will be a religious-minded man but sensual.
   5. In the 5th house-He will be a devotee of lord Vishnu, popular and becomes rich by self-effort. He may acquire vehicles.
6. In the 6th house-The person will have evil thoughts and
intentions. Short-tempered and mean-minded fellow as he is he will be very unpopular and will be roaming about without any peace of mind.
   7. Io the 7th house-He will be owner of lands and houses. If the 7th house falls in a movable sign ( rasi ) be will earn his livelihood in a distant place from his birthland ; if that house fa,ls in a fixed sign, he will be employed in his own birthplace.
   8. Io the 8th house-The native may be plunged into miserable circumstances, he may be impotent, his father may die early, and may be involved into litigation and lose his landed property.
  9. Io the 9th house-The ative will b fortunate, he will have his own properties, his father too will be lucky and the r.ative himself will be prosperous and happy. Of course if the 4th lord is afflicted or 9th lord is unfavourably posited the good results will not be predicted or astrologers should be cautious in making favourable predictions.
   10. In the 10th house-He will be an expert chemist and a successful politician, he will be an illustrious personality to be adored by great men of the world ( provided the 4th and the 10th lords are powerful). If the 4th lord is afflicted the." is chance of loss of reputation.
   11. Io the 11th house-The person will be a self-made man and will rise to the positiou of eminence. He will be generous and sickly. His mother may be fortunate.
   I?. In the 12th house-The person shall have to lead a miserable life due to poveny and will be deprived of mental peace. Early death of the mother is possibk.


CHAPTER-VI
THE FIF'TH HOUSE

   The fifth house denotes intellect, taLnt, devotion to God, royal favour, secret counsel, educatinn and learning wisdom and children.
The fifth  place  is primarily  termed as  place  concerning
children ( Putrastliana). Tbc Karaka planet is Vrhaspathi. But while giving judgment about children the fifth place from Chandra, Vrhaspathi and the 9th house are to be examined carefully. One may get children from those piands as well as the 5th and 9th lords during their casa and antarda,as.
   If the 5ti- or 7th place from lagna o, Chandra is occupied or aspecled by or conjoint:d with benefic planers good results may be predicted abo,,t son and wife both, on the other hand if those places or their lords become malefic due to a,pect of or conjun­ ction with unfavourable planets we can  not expect any good result about children and wife.
   !lefore we give our judgment about children we must first of all asc,,rtain whether there is any sign of barrenness in the native', chart. We therefore shall take up those yogas that may make a person sterile. They are as follows :

Signs of sterility :
  (a) If the 5th place is occupied by 2 or 3 malefic planeta and lagna is aspected by the enemy of lagnadhipathi the native and his wife ( vice versa ) become barren.
   (b) If lagna rises at Makar or Kumbha with Sani there or Sani's aspect on lagna without receiving any aspect of or association with any benefic the native's life-partner becomes barren.
   (c) If lagna rises at Karkata or Simha rasi and the 7th place from the lagna is·aspected by or associated with Sani the native may be barren.
In  case  of  both (b) and (c) rules sign of barrenness will be
taken as nullified if Sani becomes otherwise strong in Navamsa

JNDICATION OF BHAVAS	147
Chakra, or Kendra position or the lord of the 5th house receives the aspect of or is in conjunction with any oenefic.
Let me cite two examples :
  (i) Lagna is in Kumba with Sani there, the 4th house from lagna is posited by Vrhaspathi. The native is the father of 13 children.
   (ii) This is the birth chart of Mrs. Indi,a Gandhi, Lagna is associated with Sani, and Chandra is in the 7th place from l1gna, the 5th lord Mangal is in the 2nd place. Srrni in Na vamsa Cb.akra occupies his own rasi Makar and he is ther fore strong. Here Sth place from lagna is aspected by Vrhaspathi a natural benetic and the lord of bhagyasthana { 9th place ).
   (d) If the lagna is associated with Sani, and Sukra is situated in the 7th place from lagna or the 7th place is occupied by Ravi and Sani the native shall be barren in ooth the cases provided Vrhaspathi has full aspect on the 10th place from lagna.
   (e) If the 5th place is aspected by a malefic and the lords of the 2nd and 5th houses are weak the native shall have no issue inspite of more than one wife.
If the native gets a child and the 5th house is aspected by tbe
6th lord B dha the child born to him is to be taken as bastard.
   (f) Vrhaspathi in the 5th house is said to be ineffectual so far concerned with children unless the 5th place is aspected by its lord. Vrhaspathi alone in the 5th place may give one or two children only and the native will seldJm be happy about them.

A woman who bears only one child
   The 5th place signifies womb of a woman and the 8th place denotes genital organ. If these two places and/or their lords are influenced by malefics the disease in the sexual organs may be anticipated, and in such cases the native { a woman) may not have any issue.
Yogas concerning that result are given beiow :
   1. If the 5th lord is conjoined with a malefic planet and combust or the debilitated 5th lord is posited in the 6th place.
   2. If the debilitated 5th lord occupies 8th or 12th places and the 5th place is associated with Budha and Ketu.

148	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
   3. If the 5th lord does not cast his aspe t on the 5th place occupied by Budha and Sani.
4. The 5th place is occupied by Vrhaspathi and from Vrhas•
pathi the 5th place is occupied by Sani and from Sani the 5th place is occupied by Rahn.
   5. If the 5th lord without receiving any aspect of a favour­ able planet is posited in the 5th place the native gets a few children.
6. Similarly if Vrhaspathi alone occupies the 5th place the
native gets a few children, of course if the 5th lord aspects the 5th house this yoga ( of getting a few children) is nullified.

The following Yogas signify birth of one child & Yog• concerning a woman giving birth to dead children,
  7, (a) If these three places, viz. 6th, 8th and 12th are occupied by malefic planets the native in case of a woman's birth chart, will give birth to still-born or dead children, in case of man•s birth chart the native may not have any issue at all,
   (b) If the malefic planets are situated in the 5th place and from Vrhaspathi's position the 5th place is occupied by Saui or Mangal and the lord of lagna is posited in the 2nd place, children of the native shall be shortlived.

Yoga of childlessness in a woman's Rasi-Chakra ( birth curt )
   8. If in a woman's birth chart Janma-raai	( rasi where Chandra is situated ) falls in Karkata, Vrscika or Mina and Chandra in Navamsa chakra is situated in the 7th house from the native's lagna with Sukra there and Jata-lagna is associated with Sani without any planet in the 5th place from Lagna-the woman becomes barren.
   Further there are •pecial rules of testing yogas that confer a man or a woman children at proper time or at bit late in age etc, The rules are stated below :

According to a -woman's rasi cbakra :
   Add together the degree, amsa & kala of Chandra, Mangat and Vrhaspathi, if total figures thus obtained indicates even rasi the woman may have children, If the Navamsa rasi obtained

INDICA:J:ION OF BRA VAS	149
from that total figures also indi=ate even rasi the native must get children.
   If these figures indicate odd rasi and Navamsa rasi shows even rasi the child may be born to the woman after timely treatment by a competent physician. If both of them signify odd rasi, the lady shall have no child at all.

According to a man's rasi chakra :
   Add together the degree, amsa & kala of Ravi, Vrhaspathi and Sukra. If the total figures thus obtained indicate odd ra,i the native shall have children. The possibility of get)ing children will be more certain if the Navamsa rasi determined from those figures too falls in an odd rasi. If however one is in odd rasi and another is in even sign, birth of children may be possible after the native undergoes thorough medical treatment.
   If both the rasis indicate even sign no child may be born to the native.
9. Birth of children very late in age :
Maharshi Parasar says :
   (i) If Mangal be'the lord of lagna and is posited in bis house of exaltation, and Ravi and Sani together are situated in the 8th place the native gets a son very late in age.
   {Ii) If the 5th house is occupied by Budha, Sani and Vrbaspathi and the 5th lord is posited in lagna or in any beneficial rasi or
   (iii) If Sani is in lagna, Vrhaspathi in the 8th place and Mangat in the 12th and the lord of the 5th house is weak­
The native gets children very late in age.
10. Adopted son :
   The native may adopt a son under the following configuration of planets in his birth chart :
(i) The 5th lord is posited in the 9th, Chandra is situated in
a malefic house and 5th or 9th place from Chandra is occupied by lagnadhipathi.
   (ii) If the 5th house from lagna is owned by Budha or Sani and that house is aspected by Sani, or Gulika is posited there.
   (iii) The 5th is owned by Chandra who is situated in lagna, Sani occupies the 5th house and Vrhaspathi attains full strength,

15i)	lllNDU SCIENCE OF THI! FUTURE

Other in.portant things about the Stb house and its lord.
   It was already stetcd that 5th house denotes intellect, talent dcv,)tion t() god, wisdom, children etc.
   Vrhaspathi mainly rules over t2.lent. intellc.:;t, learning, wisdom and children. Bud ha and Sukra signify among other thing'; intelligence, education and knowledge.
-·· if  a  ma1.'s  intell, ct,  wisdom  etc.  ar.! to be judg?d
primarily position of Vrh:?> pathi and  5th  house and its  lords ,1r.:
10 lie looked iPto, if the 5th house is associated with a favourable pbnet or the hJu.;0 is situated b:.::twcen two benefics and Vrhaspatti js posited in Kendra or Kona houi- the r,ativ:::'s intellec'. and talent may be developed.
   !f the 5th house is occupied by Budha and Sukra the native is able to utilise his intelligence in practical field and may attain success in his academic career.
   If Ravi is in the 5th house the native will be sober, Chaidra thee-: wiP make him fick!t:-minded, Mangal there make:; him mischi';',·ously inc!incj, Rudha m.11.kes him  temperate. Sukra in the )rh house makes a man of slow intellect and Sani and Rahu
,r ,he 5th house will make him man ofper.·,rted intellect.
   The 5th house indicates i·. estine, liver etc. If the 5th place is situated in a walery sign with any watery planet the native may pass liquid stool. If the 5th house falls h  a dry or win;i; rasi  with  dry  phnct  there  the  native  may  suffer  frpm
constipation.
   fhe 5th house also denotes penance, religious austerity, devotion w Gods, spiritual initiatibn.  So, if the 9th house and its lord and 5th house and its lord are favourao!y disposed tile na•'ve will be religiously inclined and will be overwhelmed wi1h sen•jment of devotion.
   if the lords of the 5th ,nd 9th houses arc natural denoters of moral goodness, the qualities referred to above will be developea gradually more and more.
   Sukra also rules over divine qualities. So, if he is in the 5th house or being the lord of the 9th is posited in tho 5th the nativ,· aspires after acquiring divine qualities.
Again if Sukra·being in the 5th house joi.ns Sani  the native
ha:-; an	unswerving  devotion  to  God and become an auster·.
devotee.

1"'D!CATION OF BHAVAS	151

II. Yogas that meke man an author :
Authorship is to be determined from the 5th bhava.
  (a) If Chandra or Vrhaspathi is posited in the Navamsa rasi where atmakarak:1 planet is situated, or
  (b) Any of these two planets are situated in the 5th or 9th place from atmakaraka Navamsa rasi, or
(c) If the 5th or 9th place from lagna ( of the birth chart) is
occupied by any of those two planets the native becomes an anthor.
  (d) If Sukra joins Chandra the native will be an author of mediocre standard and shall earn moderate name and fame.
   (e) If Chandra joins Budha the native shall be an author of Jrdinary calibre.
   (f) If Chandra joins both Budha and Sukra he will be an illustrious HUthor and shall be a poet, dramatist. fiction and story vvriter, a nevelist and historian too.
(g) If  Chandra  is conjoined  with Vrhaspathi  along with
iludha 'Jr Sukra th.e native shall write books on philosophic and ot!ier s,orious subjects. If Budha, Vrhaspathi ar;d Sukra join Ch.andra the native shall write books on astrology, medicine, µh.ilosophy, art and accountancy.
  (h) If Rahu or Ketu joins Chandra and any two among Budha, Vrhaspathi and Sukra are associated with them the native may he vastly learned in mathematics and astrology.
12. Yogas causing sharp intellect:
Budha is the natural indicator of intelligence.
   (i) So, if Budha is powerful and weil-disposcd, and the 5th lord is aspected by a benefic or the 5th house is associated with a favourable planet,
   (ii) If the 5th lord at his highest exalted point casts his aspect just on the bhava-madhya of the 5th house,
  (Iii) If the lord of Navamsa of the 5th lord is aspected by a benefic,
(Iv)  If Navamsa lord of Bud ha is posited in Kendr.: or Kona
and is aspected by the 5th lord,
   (v) If the lord of the 5th house being posited in the 9th is aspccted by a bencfic or occupies an auspicious hou•e,
(vi) If the 5th house is situated just between  two favourable
planets,

152	HINDU SCIBNCB OF THB FUTURE

  (vii) While 5th lord is in the 9th place, Vrhaspathi in the 5th and 5th bhava is posited between two benefics,
   (viii) If the 5th place being associated with a benefic is situated between favourable planets and Vrhaspathi is posited in Kendra or Kona the native will be a man of sharp intellect.
i 3. If Sani occupying the 5th house aspects the lord of Lagna
and the 5th lord conjoins with a malefic planet the native slowly becomes intellectually dull.
   14. The native loses his memory if Sani, Rahu or Gulika is situated in the 5th place and the 5th lord is aspected by a malefic planet. Of course inspite of ti-is yoga if Bud ha i& associated with a favourable planet the subject slowly regains his memory.
   '5. In most cases it was observed that the native loses memory if the 5th lord joins an unfavourable planet and be in malefic Sasthyamsa ( one-sixtyeth part of a rasi ).
  16.  If the 5th house falls in Prithwi rasis ( Vrsa, Kanya & Makar rasis) the native will possess retentive memory, imagination and deep feeling.
The  5th house is considered as a house of emotion and virtue
or piety. If the planets that signify these qualities are posited in the fifth house, and the character of that sign is consistent
,ith the planet or planets situated therein, the emotional side of the native will hJ developed. If the horoscope does not show any other unfavourable disposition of planets the native can not be corrupted. Rather he will be more and more religious­ minded if Vrhaspathi and the 9th lord also are favourable.

Results of the lord of the 5th house occupying dilferent bha,as.
   In the 1st house : According to Parasari Hora, if the 5th lord is situated in lagna the native becomes evil-minded, a miser even he will nGt part with a single pice from his pocket. Thia may be the result if the 5th lord is afflicted, under that circum­ stance the person may be a cheat, a leader of a gang of swindlers. Ilut astrological savants are of opinion that if the 5th lord is favourably associated or aspected by favourable planets the person may he the master of a number of servants, he may become a judge or a magistrate or a minister empowered by tho

INDIOATION OF BHAVAS	153
law of the land to punish wrong-doers and he shall be a God­ fearing person.  He will have few children.
   In the 2nd house: When the 5tb lord is favourably disposed the person will be blessed with a beautiful wife and bis children will behave themselves with him very respectfully. He will earn money from Government and will be a learned man and a good astrologer.
   If the 5th lord is afflicted and otherwise weak the person will be a poverty-stricken man, unable to maintain his family, and may suffer from domestic troubles, Parasari Hora says that he may be attacked with asthma or other kind of phlegmatic troubles.
   In the 3rd house: When the 5th lord is favourably disposed the native may have many children and brothers, if the lord is unfavourable due to aspect of or association with malefics the native may be a deceitful person, will suffer from continuous occupational troubles and may have to lament over loss of children.
   In the 4th house: If the 5th lord is favourably disposed the person may become a minister, adviser to the king or a preceptor. His mother will live long and be happy. If the lord is afflicted premature death of children is possible.
   In the 5th house: If the lord is favourably disposed the pers0n will have a few children, he will prosper in his own vocational career and will be adored by men in power. He may be a great mathematician or head of a religious institution. If the lord is afflicted premature death of children is possible, he will be cruel, fickle-minded, sometimes harsh in his dealing wifa others.
   In the 6th honse: Lord being favourably disposed, benefit through maternal uncle who may be a man of repute, enmity with his sons. If the lord is afflicted he may adopt or purchase a son and then adopt.
   In the 7th house: The result will be very favourable if the 5th lord is powerful and well-disposed in the 7th house. The native will be renowned, learned, prosperous, faithful to his master and a man of cbarming personality. One of his sons will live abroad and shall earn name, fame and wealth.

154	HINDU SOIENOE OF THE FUTURE
   If the lord is afflicted there may be loss of children and one of his sons shall die after attaining name and fame.
In the 8th house:  Loss of paternal property due to debt, may
suffer from lung or intestinal trouble, he will he peevish and
unhappy,  His financial condition will not be bad.
   In the 9th house: When the lord is favourahly disposed the person may be a preceptor or teacl-er, may renovate ancient temples. wells and gardens. One of his sons may be an author and will attain distinction and be as great 1s a king. If the lord is atnicted destruction of fortune is possible due to divine wrat!l.
In the 10th house:  When  the  5th  lord  is  favoarable  the
per3on acquires !a,,J,d proprty, is held in high esteem by the King, perform r ligious deeds, one of his sons becomes a famous man and raises tile status and prestige of the family. If the 5th lord is affiicted unfavourable results will happen.
   In the 11th house : The lord if not afflicted, success in all under'. ,kings, becomes a learned and efficient man, pop,;lar, blessed with sons, extends helping hand to o\hers during their bad days, becomes an author, and rich; when the lord is afflicted the person becomes a mn:1 having shallow knowledge, earns money through hard labour and st.enuous effort.
  In the 12th house: The 12th home is a place of salvation. So if the 5th lord is favourable, unattached with or unaspectcd by
any malefic and the 9th lord is favourably disposed the native"·"' attains salvation, atleast becomes great spiritually and  visits many holi shrines and lives in company of great 'Sadb11s' (ascetics). If the lord is afflicted there will be a show of austerity with no attainment of beneficial result, he may roam hither and thither sometimes aimlessly.

THE SIXTH HOUSE
   The Sixth house rules enemy, accidents, disease, mental aft.lictions, mothl"'r's brotiler, stepmother, co u•ife. litigation and misfortunes.
1. If the sixth house falls in an auspicious sign (rasi) and the
bhava is associated with or aspe.cted by benefic planet unfavour­ able results signified by the Sixth bhava should not be expected. Contrary results may happen when the Sixth  house falls  in an

INDIOA'.rlON 01' BH AVAS	155
inauspicious sign conjoined with or aspected by an unfavourable planet.
   2. If the three weak malefic planets are posited in the (Jch or 8th place or these two bhavas are aspected by three weak malefics the native remains sickly since his birth and all along suffers due to monetary loss. He is mentally troubled owing to activities of t>r :mies.
   On the other hand if powerful Budha, Vr1' spathi, Sukra and favourable Chandra are situated in the 6th place the native's granary will be full of grain and cereals and the treasury also will never be empty.
   (i) If the 6th lord associates with ,,r is aspected by a malefic and is situated in lagna the pers01 will suffer fr,,,n boils, if the 6th lord aspected by or conjoined ·vith malefic, is situated in the 5th. house his son will suffer from boils, if such an afflicted 6th lord is posited in 4th the mother will suffer from boils etc.
   (ii) If '. avi associated with a friendly planet and benefic planet h placed in the 6th tee native's enemies will be vanquished. If Rav, associated with a malefic and unfriendly planet is situated in the 6th house the person is always troubled by enemies.
   (iii) Weak and malefic Chandra in the 6th is the cause of suffering due to attack of vatioµs diseases.
(iv) The debilitded Mangal in the 6th  house causes danger
t<> life and the native sustains monetary loss.
   (v) A retrograde Vrhaspathi being in the 6th place when posited in an enemy house gives the native awful troubles due to activities of an enemy or enemies
(vi) If the 6th lord being in tho 6th is associated with Sani and
Rahu the native also suffers much due to acdv;ties of enemies.
   (vii) If the weak 6th !Nd is situated in a dusthana ( 6th, 8th or 12th place ) and the lord of lagna is powerft&l and well­ disposed the native can surmount all the ob tacles and subdues his enemies.
   (viii) There is danger from fire or  chance of loss of money due to activities of thieves if the 6th lord is combined with Sani and Mangat.
   3. If afflicted Ravi is placed in the 6th house ;be person suffers from headache, any disease due to poison, heart trouble, gastritis or any other disease due to defective secretiou of biles.

156	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURB

  4. Afflicted Chandra in the 6th indicates Bii.lii.ristha (serious illness) during early childhood. The native may be attacked with periodic fever, asthma, lung disease, hydrocele etc.
   5. Afflicted Mangal in the 6th makes the native suffer from Hrematemesis ( disease involving spontaneous haemorrhage). cholera, pox, measles, ulcer, piles, fistula, blood dysentery, accident, wound by any weapon etc. The native may experience loss of money and troubles through employees,
  It the afflicting planet is Sani there is chance of death due to operation or injury by animals. IfRahu afflictsMangaldeath may be due to suicide, if it is Ketu the native may die by poisoning.
  6. If Bud ha is afflicted and an indicator of disease is situated in the 6th place the native may suffer from indigestion, hysteria, loss of memory.
   7. If Vrhaspathi is an indicator of disease and being afflicted is posited in the 6th bhava the person may suffer from asthma, typhoid, dyspepsia, liver trouble, diarrhoea, apoplexy, pthysis.
   8. If afflicted Sukra positioned in the 6th place in the birth chart of a woman she suffers from leucorrhoea, disease of ovary or uterus, syphilis etc. In case of a male the native may be attacked with syphilis, dropsy, inflammation of prostate gland, diabetes, impotency, eye trouble.
   Afflicted Sani in the 6th place causes Paralysis, nervous ailments, hysteria, enlargement of spleen, lunacy and asthma.
   10. Afflicted Rahu or Ketu causes flatulence, toothache, diarrhoea, worms, morbid condition of nerves. The lord of the sign where Rahu or Ketu is posited will also indicate the disease.
11. Special Yogas concerning disease :
  (a) If the 6th house and its lord are affiicted by an unfavourable planet or by association with Sani and Rahu, and both these planets are situated in the 6th place the native remains sickly throughout his life.
  (b) If 6th lord is in the 8th place and 6th place is occupied by Mangal the person is attacked with high fever at the age of 12 years.
   (c) If Chandra and Vrhaspathi are in the 6th bhava the native is attacked with any kind of disease in the womb or belly at the age of 19 or 22 years.

INDICATION OF BHAVAS	157
   (d) Rahu in the 6th, Lagna lord in the 8th and Gulik in any Kendra, possibility of attack of pthysis.
   (e) The 2nd lord in the 6th and the 6th lord in the 12th, possibility of enlargement of spleen at the age 8 or 29 years.
   (f) If 6th bhava is occupied by Chandra combined with Sani the native may be attacked with leprosy at the age of 55 years.
   (g) Lagnapathi in lagna and Sani in the 6th, chance of attack with rheumatism or gout.
   It would be wrong if our reailers gather this impression that in all cases planets occupying the 6th house which is termed as dusthana or inauspicious house will give unfavourable results. But in practice this is not all true. The following rules will testify our statement :
   12,(a) Ravi in the 6th house : The native hr.comes a good and famous politician, and successful in his endeavours. The result will be otherwise if Ravi is affiicted.
   (b) Chandra: When favourable and strong in the 6th bhava the native shows his e!liciency and attains success in his vocational career.
  (c) Mangal when favourable and strong in the 6th bhava, the native may be highly sensual, an able administrator or politician.
   (d) Budha favourable and strong in the 6th bhava, a man of sharp intellect outwardly a good man but quarrelsome, yet he is respected by many, his educational career is not smooth-sailing. le) Vrhaspathi does not give any good result in the 6th
house.
  (/)  If Sukra unaffiicted be in the 6th bhava the native has no enemy, he is benefited by women but may be corrupted by young women.
   (g) Sani in the 6th house makes a man qurrelsome but courageous and the native can undertake very hard task and complete it to his satisfaction.
  (h) Rahu in the 6th bhava makes a person long-lived, wealthy but he may be troubled by enemies.
   (i) Ketu in the 6th bhava gives very best result, the native may earn name and fame and may have no enemy.
   This is also to be remembered that astrologers must be cautious in applying  the above rules without  taking  into

158	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE

considerations of aspect, conjuncricn and other	important factors that may modify the goud effect cf plane,; in the 6th house	To explain further. kt us take <Ln ex:imple--Chandra when strong and favourable docs good to the uatiYc but if she is afflicted by the aspect of any unfavourable planet Chandra may be t e cause of hysteria, mental derangement (may be lun"cy) etc.
   When the planets in the 6th house are afflicted the native may suffer from many ailments. Nature of diseases are suggested here below :
   {i) If 6th place falls in a fixed sign ( Rasi) with afflicted Ravi heart trouble, a thma, nerve isease etc. may be anticipated but aspect of favourable Vrhaspathi on Ravi may neutralise all these bad effects.
   If Ravi be in a movable rasi and is afflicted disease of indigestion is possible, here also aspect of favourable and strong Vrhaspatbi will do him good.
(ii) When Chandra in the 6th house is afflicted by Rahu or
Ketu indigestion, skin disease, loss of mental peace may be possible ; if she is afflicted by Sani vat(ous sorts of chronic diseases, mental derangement, and when she is afflicted by Ravi bad liver and complaint of indigestion are possible.
   (iii)	When M:rngal in the 6th is afflicted by Rahn or Kctu the native s\lffers from despondency and always thinks of suicide or death by poisoning ; when afflicted by Sani the native is inclined to pick up quarrel with any body and every body and may be  involved into litigation with brothers.  The native may be short-tempered and haughty.
(iv)  When Budha is afflicted by Rahu,	Ketu or  Sani  the
native suffers from despondency, abnormal mental condition and may be easily excitable.
(v)  Vrhaspathi in the 6th house when afflicted makes the
native a voracious eater of sweets and meat and in the long run suffers from serious trouble of indigestion. Vrhaspathi under that circumstance causes great hardship too.
(vi)  Sukra when afflicted is the cause of urinary trouble,
disease of sexual or!\an, etc. and the native may be addicted to wine and women.
(vii)  Afflicted Sani in the 6th causes serious illness, incurable
diseases, gout, paralysis etc.

INDICATION OF JlHVASA	159

Occupation of 6th lord in differeut hhavas and results thereof la the Isl houso:  Maharsi  Parasar says, the native will be a
famous man, rich, highly qualified, efficient, and  courag.::ous but
 e shall have no son if the 6th lord is in the 1st h0use. 01her astrologers are of opinion that when wcll-aspected the 6th lord in the 1st house may make the native a high administrative officer, a minister of war or an official concerned with pri ons.
   But there is an exception in c::ist" of Tula Lagna-Jala!,a.  lf the lagna is in Tula fl.nd the 6th lord Vrhaspathi is with La:1n:.'. tbe native never keeps goo::! health and suffers set back in :-ilmos1 all  his endc:avours. "!'Aahttrs; Parasar rightly said that hTufa hgna Gurus Khalas" i.e. in case of Tula lagna  Vrhaspathi is very nnfavourable.
Unfavourable ( i.e. weak and otherwise afflicted) 6th  lord  iil
the first house is not a favourable yoga for a native, one should not welcome the weak and otherwise afflicted 6th lord in the !st house.  For, it makes a man a thief, robber or a leader of a criminal gang.
   lo the 2nd house: If the 6th lord is posited in the .2nd house the native shall be courageou:,, single miaded devotion to his duties, an ora!or and happy. But the native may have untold suffering in family life, will be disowned by his kith and kin and shall have to live in a foreign land. If afflicted he will have defective vision, uneven setting of teeth and may be a srnmmerer and poverty stricken. His wife may fall seriously ill during the dasa and bhukti of malefic planets.
   lo the 3rd house: The native may be a man of violent temper, cruel, malicious, intolerant, and rich.  He will  be inimical to his brothers and incur loss of money due to inimical activities of his maternal uncle.
   In the 4th house: There may be obstacles in academic career, relation with mother may not be as congenial as it should be.  If the 6th lord is afflicted he shall quarrel with his mother and ancestral property may be involved in debt. He will not enjoy peace in family life.  If the 6th lord is strong and 4th lord also is favourably disposed the native may enjoy happiness and be prosperous during dasa and bhukti of benefic planets.
In the 5th house: Uncertainty in money-making activities,

160	HINDU SCIENCE OF THB FUTURE

at times he shall suffer from poverty. That is also the case in respect of his friends. His children will be sickly, may be adopted by his ma,ernal uncles and be fortunate.
   In the 6th house : When the 6th lord occupies the 6th place the native shall be rich and shall have his own cars and other vehicles. His own kith and kin shall be hostile to him but he will be popular among others. If the weak lord of lagna is conjoined with the 6th lord the native will suffer from incurable disease.
In the 7th house:  The native will be financially aflluent and
shall earn name and fame if the 6th lord is fortified in the 7th house. If the lord is afllicted the wife of the native may be a woman of suspicious character, his relation with her may be unfavourable.  There is another opinion held by other classes of astrologers who say that the wife will be sickly and the nati ve's conjugal life will not be happy. If the 7tb. place falls in signs ow,eed by Sani or Budha the native may be sexually weak.
   In the 8th house: Indication of Madhyayu ( Middle life). Success in life after many obstacles or through great hardship. If 6th lord is afllicted the native will be a women hunter and be heavily in debt. He shall frequently suffer from illness and will have strained relation with learned men. He will find pleasure in causing distress to others.
   In the 9th house : The maternal uncle of the native will be a fortunate man and the fatb.er will be a judge. Strained relation with the father is possible. He may be benefited by his cousins, may be a timber merchant or stone cutter.
   If the 6th lord is weak and afllicted the native may indulge in sinful acts and becomes poor.
   In the 10th house :  Outwardly a pious man but unscrupulous in regard to religious matters. When favoured by a benefic he shall be courageous, dutiful and happy.  If 6th lord is afllicted he is to fight a ve,y powerful enemy and leads a low life.
   In the 11th house; The native may be highly qualified and efficient, if the 6th is weak and afflicted the native may lead a miserable life due to poverty,
In the 12th house:  The native causes harm to others, always
tries to antagoni•e learned men, if afllicted the native passes his days miserably.


CHAPTBB-VII
JAYA BHAVA
   The seventh house denotes marriage, wife or husband, trade or business, buying and selling, partnership, short journey, sexual act, bladder, lost property etc.
   If the 7th bhava and its lord is associated with or aspected by a benefic planet the wife or the husband as the case may be will be beautiful to look at, their physical structure may be charming and the native"s relation with his ( or her) father-in-law may be cordial aud domestic environment may be peaceful,
   All the rules of judging a horoscope are applicable also in case of this bhava.
   In case of a male Sukra, and in case of a female native both Sukra and Mangat signify the 7th bhava i.e. husband or wife. Therefore in judging the 7th bhava dispositon of Sukra ( in case of a male) or Sukra and Mangal (in case of a female) and the 7th house from these planets and their lords are to be taken into consideration. If they arc well-disposed, acquires favourable
Vargas or conjoined with or aspected by benefic planets tho native's conjugal life will be happy.
Number of wives :
   Now-a-days law of the land forbids a person to have more than one wife at a time. Of course a widower can marry again when his first or second wife dies. Law has nothing to do in respect of those who married again and again during the life time of their first wife before the enactment of this law. So, when a birth chart shows signs of more than one wife the verdict of the astrologer must be given after careful consideration. If the native is not a man of good character, rather he is a man of loose morals and at the same time there are signs of more than one marriage at a time the native may have one legally married wife and has other women as concubines. Therefore number of wives may be judged from that perspective.
The number of Navamsa the 7th lord traversed or the number
of planets  aspecting  the  7th  bhavil  or  number  of  planets
11

162	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE F'OXURB

conjoined with the 7th lord may be the number of wives of tho native. This sort of planetary aspect or conjunction may be commonly found in any birth chart. But that should not be the criterion in giving one's judgment. If the native is morally strong astrologer's verdict about number of wives must be other• wise. But there is no legal. bar to marry again and again in case of death of 1st and 2nd wife etc.
Two wives:
   (a) If the lagnadhipathi ( lord of lagna) is posited in the 7th c:>r 8th place and the lord of 2nd place is associated with malefic.
(bl  Or lagnadhipathi and the lord of the 7th are posited in
Iagna or 7th house,
   (c) Or lagna or the 7th house is occupied by lagnadhipathL or the 7th lord occupies lagna.
{d)  If  the lord of lagna is in the 8th and a malefic is in the
7th place or the 2nd lord is in the 8th and a malefic in the 7th.
   (e) If the 7th lord from the 7th house is joined with a benefic und is posited in the 6th or in his house of debilitation or the 7th house is occupied by a malefic.
   (f) The natural significator of marriage, viz., Sukra when conjoined with a malefic or posited in his debilitated house in Navamsa chart-these yogas indicate two wives.
One wife and one son :
   If Ravi, Chandra and the lord of lagna or the 7th lord are posited in lagna or the 7th house the person has one wife and one son.
Three wives :
   (a) If the 2no or the 7th house is occupied by number of ms.lefic planets and the 7th lord is aspected by a malefic.
   (bl If the lagna, the 2nd or the 7th house is associated with a malefic planet and the lord of the 7th house is combust or posited in his house of debilitation the native may have three
wives.
More than two wives :
The following configuration of planets signify many wives
( at least more than two wives):
(a) When the 7th lord occupying the house of eitber ani or

INDICATION OF BHAVAS	163
8ukra. is aspected by a benefic planet, ( the yoga will be very forceful if the 7th lord is exalted or in hfs own house).
   (b) Powerful Budha when occupies the 10th place from Lagna and Chandra is in the 3rd place from the 7th lord.
   (c) When the lords of the 2nd and 12th houses together are posited in the 3rd place from lagna and aspected by either Vrhaspathi or the lord of the 9th house.
   (d) When the 7th lord occupying his own, friendly or exalted house is situated in any Kendra or Kona and combined with the lord of tbe 10th house.
   (e) If the lords of the 7th and 11th houses are combined or exchange each other's house and are placed in any Kona i.e. 5th
,or 9th house.
(/)  When the lord of the 9th house is in the 7th and 7th lord
is in the 4th house.
   (g) The lords of the 7th and 11th houses are placed in any Kendra.
   The aforesaid yogas conferring more than two wives become fruitful.
Conduct of the wife :
The native's wife may be a woman of bad conduct-
   (a) If the 7th lord, the 7th house or the Navamsa lord of the Saptampathi ( lord of the 7th house ) is in conjunction with a 111alefic planet.
   Or (b)  the 7th lord and the natural indicator of the 7th house ( generally Sukra is a natural indicator of the 7th house J is in
his  house of debilitation either in the birth or Navamsa Chart and remains unaspected by any henefic.
(c) If Ravi or the lord of the 7th house is in conjunction
·with or aspected by a malefic or those two planets (Ravi and the 7th lord-at least either of them) are placed in any unfavourable house in the Navamsa chart the native's wife indulges in '8inful acts.
(d) The wife of the native n;iay be a woman of loose morals
and rough-tongued if the 7th lord is weak and the 6th house is occupied by a debilitated .or combust planet.
(e) When the lord of the 7th house together with Bud ha is
.com bust or placed in the house of debilitation or the planet is
in 6th or 8th place and conjoined with malefic planets and also

164	HINDU SCIENCE OP THE PUTURR
is hemmed in between malefics the wire of the native bringaa disrepute to her family and b1 ings about the death of her­ hnsband through her malicious activities.

A good, honest, religious minded and faithful wife :
   (a) The lord of the 7th house conjoined with a favourable planet, aspected by a benefic or is placed between beneficial' planets.
  (b) If the lord ofthe 7th house is in a favourable Navamsa, and the 10th lord is strong.
   (c) Similarly if the Karaka planet Sukra is posited in a favourable Navamsa and also the 10th lord is strong.
(d) If the  7th  lord occupies his own exalted or friendly
house,
   (e) If the lord of the 7th house acquire Gopur nrga and is posited in Makara rasi.
( A planet is said  to be in  Gopur varga when he acquires,
4 var gas of his own ).
  U1 Even if the 7th lord is a natural papa ( malefic) but is p •itcd in "  friendly house or in his house of exaltation in the birth or navamsa chart and at the same time he is conjoined with or aspected by a benefic the wife is faithful to her husband.
   (g) Similarly if the 7th lord Sani is powerfully posited in the birth chart and is in conjunction with or aspected by Vrhaspathi the wife of the native is benevolent, respectful to gods and brahmins. She will bo a person of good conduct and believes in the doctrine of Vedanta philosophy.
(h) If the 7th place from the  position  of  the  7th lord is
occ!!pied by the lord of the 2nd or the lords of lagna and the 7th house are equal in strength the family status of both the husband and the wife is of the same rank and the wife of the native is faithful and respectful to him (the native) and she will be a good­ natured person.
4. A religions minded wife practising penance :
   ( I) If the powerful lord of the 7th house, or the karaka planet in strength is associated with or aspected by Vrhaspathi the wife of the n3tive observes religious dtes and practises penance.
2)  If the 7th lord is in a favourable  rasi or in a beneficial

INDICATION OP llHAVAS	16S
navamsa and also aspected by a favourable planet the wife of
the native observes religious rites very carefully.
   (3) If Chandra is posited in any auspicious house or in 'II favourable navamsa, or occupies the house of exaltation the wife of the native is honest and good-natured.
(4) The similar result is expected if the 7th lord and also the
karaka planet are placed in a favourable rasi.
5. A bad, cruel, ill-behaved or haughty wife :
   (a) Jfthe 7th place from lagna, the lord thereof or Navamsa lord of either the 7th place or its lord is associated with or
,aspected by a malefic the wife of the native may be dishonest or ill-behaved.
   Similarly if the lord of the 7th house and the karaka of the 7th bhava are posited in their debilitated houses either in birth or Navamsa chart and they remain unaspected by a benefic planet the result as said ahove is to be predicted.
   (b) If Ravi or the lord of the 7th house is in a ,malefic Navamsa, or conjoined with or aspected by a malefic planet the wife of the native may be dishonest.
   (c) If the lord of the 7th house or Chandra is afflicted due to '8ssociation with or aspected by an unfavourable planet or any
-0f them is hemmed in between malelic planets or both the planets are in unfavourable Navamsas the wife of the native indulges in baneful acts and will be accused of heinous offence.
(d) If the 7th lord is weak and the 6th place from lagna is
-Occupied by a debilitated or combust planet the wife of the native
is wicked and rude, and she may have illicit relation with some person.
   (e) If the 7th lord joins Budha who is in his debilitated house, combust, or associated with a malefic or posited in the
-6th or 8th place from lagna and is also situated between malefic planets the wife of the native may kill her husband and will nin the family prestige.
   U) If the 7th lord occupies the house of debilitation or be in the 6th place from lagna aml is aspected by an unfavourable planet, and posited in a movable papa Navamsa rasi the wife of the native brings disgrace on the family.
The unfavourable results stated above ruay be modified to a
£real extent if the 7th ho,use and its lord are aspected b, , bencftc

166	HINDU SCIENCE OP THE PUTUEE
or they are situated in a favourable Navamsa and are not ii>
cruel Sasthyamsa.
6. Possibility of early marriage :
   (a) In case of a male, if Chandra is situated within the third house from lagna or within the 9th house from the 7th place. ( Chandra of brighter half will be more sure in giving effect to th is yoga ).
   [b) In case of a woman, Ravi instead of Chandra will give the same result if he (Ravi) is posited in those places.
(c) If Sukra or planets, more than one at least are posited in
watery sign.
   (d) If a powerful Chandra occupies the 5th or the 7th place from lagna.
   (e) Eminent astrologers of India believe that if the lords of the 7th and lagna are posited near to each other or the karaka planet is situated next to lagnapathi or vice-versa, or a favourable planet is posited near the lord of lagna or the 7th lord early marriage is possible.
Here are two illustrations of early marriage :
   (i) Lagna is in Simha rasi, Ravi the lord of lagna is in Tula and the karaka planet is in Vrscika rasi. The native was. married at the age of 23.
   (ii) Lagna is in Dhanu rasi. The lord of the 7th house i, in Kumbha rasi, the karaka planet Sukra is in Mina and the lord of lagna is in Mesa rasi.
   The native was married at the age of 21. In both the cases
the lagnapathi and the karaka planet are situated very near to each other.
7. The Yoga that makes a  person bachelor or  spinster
( Annrha Yoga ) :
   (1) If any	one of three planets, viz., Sukra, Ravi and Chandra ( particularly Chandra ) is aspected by or conjoined with Sani or any one of these trio is associated with Sani's. Nakshatra ( i.e. Nakshatra No. 8, 17 & 26) there is possibility of no marriage at all. The yoga may be more effective if the aforesaid conditions are fulfilled in Navamsa chart also.
   (2) When Ravi, Chandra and also the lord of the 5th house are in conjunction with or aspected by Sani the same result may be foretold,

INDICATION OF BHAVAS	167

   According to western school of astrologers the yoga as said above will also be effective if these planets are associated with or aspected by Herschel ( Uranus ).
   (3) If Sukra is placed in a birthchart at a distance of 43• degree or more from debilitated Ravi and is aspected by or conjoined with Sani the negotiation of marriage may fall thrnugh just at the time of completion of negotiation. According to western astrologers the yoga will yield the above result more accurately  if Sukra under  that  circumstance  is afflicted by Pluto.
   (4) If the 7th place remains unoccupied by any planet and Chaudra in case of a woman, and Ravi in case of a man, are aspected by Sani occupying Vrscika rasi the marriage of a person is an uncertainty.
   Western astrologers are of opinion that when Sani is in Square aspect with Ravi or Chandra the same result may be expected.
  (5) If the 7th lord, lagna and Sukra fall in an unfertile rasi there is least possibility of marriage.
( Unfertile rasis are Mithune, Simha, Kanya and Dhanu ),
   These yogas ( i.e. Configuration of planets) may not be found in toto in all cases, but if most of the conditions set forth above are there in a radical chart the aforesaid result may be expected.
8. Late Marriage :
   (1) In case of a man if the 4th or 10th place is occupied by Chandra, in case of a woman if Ravi occupies the 4th or l0tlt place marriage may certainly be delayed if the native is born in Krishna Paksha ( I.e. during dark moon ).
   (2) If Mesa rasi is occupied by Sukra or by more than two planets, Or
   (3) Lagna or Chandra falls in an unfertile sign the judgment of late marriage may be pronounced.
  In theae cases both the birth and Navamsa cltarts should be consulted.
(4) Our experience in matter of late marriage is as follows:
  {a) Of tile 2nd, Sth, 7th, 8th or 12th house from lagna if any two or three houses are occupied by Sani, Maogal, Ra vi, Rahu
-particularly by Sani and Rahu, Mangat and Rahu or Ravi and Sani there is strong possibility of late marriage.
{b)  It becomes a matter of headache for parent,	o.rding

168	HINDU SOIENOI! Ol' THI! l'UTURB
marriage of their children if those houses mentioned above (from
Sukra and Chandra ) are associated with malefic planets.
Illustrations oflate marriage :
   (i) Lagna is in Kanya, in the 2nd place Rahu, in the 3rd place Ravi and Budha, in the 4th place Sukra, the 7th house ia occupied by Vrhaspathi, the 8th place by Sani and Ketu and Chandra is in Mithune ( 10th place from lagna ).•
   (ii) Lagoa is in Vrscika rasi, occupied by Ravi, Budha in the 2nd. Chandra in the 3rd, Vrhaspathi in the 4th. Sani in the 5th, Ketu in the 6th, Man gal in the I Ith and the 12th house is occupied by Sukra and Rahu.
In the first instance lagna and Chandra are in unfertile rasis,
again Chandra in the 10th place from Lagoa, Sani in the 8th, Rahu in the 2nd and Sani aspects Chandra.
   In the second instance Sani is in the 5th, Rahu in the 12th and the 2nd house is aspected by Mangat and Sani.

lnspite of these yogas marriage is possible under the following
circumstances :
  (a) If lagna is occupied by Sukra and the lord of the 11th house.
   (b) If powerful Vrhaspathi is posited in the 5th place from lagna, the 7th house from powerful Chandra is occupied by Sukra and the 7th house from lagna is not occupied by any malefic planet.
   (c) If Vrhaspathi being in the 5th or 9th house from lagna aspects lagna, Chandra is beneficial due to aspect of or conjunction with favourable planets and is not situated between malefic, or is not afflicted due to aspect or conjunction with any unfavourable planet.
   (d) If the 7th lllrd is powerful and favourably situated and at the same time he is aspected by or conjoined with favourable planets.

   >1oSome astrologers ma.ka Vrha.apathi in the 7th house responsible for delay in ma.rriag(l and experience has in many ca.seP. borne thiFJ out. But nevertheless, the respoaRibility of Vrba.spathi ·in these cases rema.ins doubtful. Many competent a8tro1ogen think Vrha.spathi in the 7th house makes a succeaeful marriage. .Tatah:a.. Pa.rijat declares quite uuequivoca.bly that Vrhaape.thl in the '1th house givea the a•ive a bride desirable in every respect.

INDICATION Oil' BHAVAS	169

Under the above circumstances tbe  yoga conferring 'no
marriage' may be considered as cancelled.
   In respect of cancellation of 'Anurha Yoga• ( Yoga of no marriage) in the birth chart the Navamsa chakra also should be examined, If the 'Anurha Yoga' is thus found as cancelled in the rasi or Navamsa chakra the marriage may be held during the odasa antardasa of favourable planets.
If Vrhaspathi in transit moves to 5th, 7th or 9th place from
lagna, Chandra or Sukra-particularly Chandra, marriage of the native is possible during favourable dasa and antardasa.
Before we enter into elaborate discussions about timing of the
most important event like marriage we must admit that among various astrological problems that confront an astrologer the
·timing of marriage is the most difficult one that cannot be predicted with utmost certainty. The astrologer is really bewildered not knowing which rule among various ones may be 1uitably applicable in a particular case as in authoritative books there are so many to determine the period of marriage.
   Generally astrologers are of opinion that marriage occurs when transiting Vrhaspathi traverses the 1st, 2nd, 5th, 7th, 9th
-or I Ith place from lagna or Chandra.
   It is not always easy to predict accurately when marriage will take place even with all our knowledge in astrology. Our ancient rishis have laid down ce•tain rules based on the following :

Important factors for determining the time of Marriage :
1i)	Yogas that confer marriage.
(ii) Planetary conditions ( Avastha ).
(iii) Dasas helpful to this important eveAt.
(iv) Gochara ( transit of planets).
   (a) When the lord of the 7th house is situated in a beneficial sign, Sukra is favourably disposed ( i.e. in his own sign, house of exaltation or associated with his own Nakshatra, viz. 2, 11, 20) muriage occurs at pre-puberty age. Now.a-days legaily minimum age of marriage is 17 years. So, the aforesaid marriage may signify 17 years to 20 years of age.
   (b) If Ravi occupies the 7th house and the 7th lord conjoined with Sukra is situated in a kendra, marriage is possible within 23 to 25 years of age. If the 7th lord or Sukra is afHicted in birth

170	HINDU BCIBNCB 01' THB l!'UTURB
or  Navamsa chart  marriage  may be delayed.  In such· easel-'
marriage may occur in between 30 and 33 years of age.
   (c) If the 2nd house is occupied by Sukra and the 11th house, by the 7th lord event of marriage may occur in between the ages of 23 and 28 years.
   (d) When Sukra is situated in any kendra and the lord of the 7th is posited in any house owned by Sani aspected by a benefic the 4ge of marriage may be predicted as 23 to 28 years of age. In rural area where people are no: so modernised marriage under the above circumstance may occur at 15 to 16 years of age..
   (e) When the 7th house is occupied by Sukra, Chandra and Sani marriage of tb.e native concerned will not be possible before 30th year of age-it may be 35th year also.
   (f) When 11th house is occupied by the lord of the 2nd and the 10th place by tb.e lord of lagna marriage may occur within the reasonable period of 17 to 20 years of age.
   (g) If the lord of the 2nd is posited in the 11th house and the lord of the 11th in the 2nd place from lagna reasonable period of marriage is 16 to 25 years of age in a modernised family and I+ to 16 years of age in a rural area.
   (h) If the lagna rasi of a Navamsa chart falls in the 7th house of Janma chakra (birth chart) and the 7th lord is situated' in the 12th house from lagna marriage event may happen iu,. between the ages of 16 to 20 years.
   (i) If the 8th house in a Navamsa chart happens to be the 7th­ house in the birth chart and Sukra in case of a male and Sukra and Mangal aspected Vrhaspathi in case of a female occupy tho rasi indicated by Navamsa lagna the marriage period may be fixed in any one of 25 to 27 years of age.

Definite period or marriage :
   Definite period of marriage may be determined in different dasa and antardasa. The su@gestions with regard to such daaa and antardasa are given here below.
   1. It is superfluous to mention here that the lord of the 7th place is the main significator of marriage.
   (ii)  Again when the lords of 7th and 2nd places arc related in any way their dasa and antardasa also may be indicated aa. suitable period of marriage.

INDIOATION OE' BHAVAS	171

   (Iii) The 7th lord from Sukra or Chandra ma} hasten marriage of the native during their dasa-antardasa.
  (iv) The lords of 5th, 9th, 10th •Or 12th may indicate marriage of the native in their dasa and antardasa provided any of them is related to the 7th lord.
   This is to remind our readers that marriage may be delayed if lagna, 2nd, 5th, 8th, or 10th house is occupied by any one of Sani, Mangal and Rahu.
   Again if Chandra and Sani, or Sukra and Sani are combined together, or 7th or 8th house from the position of Sukra is occupied by Sani marriage is delayed.
   Of course the yoga of delay in marriage may be modified if the planets responsible for delay are aspected by or related in any other manner to a favourable planet.
   Some of the modern Indian astrologers have observed that Rahn is the patent match-maker and other planets are not so significant as Rahu. So, they say :
(a) If dasa of Rahu comes within  the  marriageable age
marriage may be held in bis dasa in preference to 01ber planets.
   (b) The 9th lord from lagna, Chandra lagna or A. M. lagna ( i.e. the mean position of ascendant and M. C ), the planets seated in the 9th house or planets aspect that house may cause marriage during their dasa and antardasa.
   It is needless to say that the stronger one out of those planets associated with the 2nd place or lord of the 2nd place from the newly found rasi will be the powerful indicator of marriage in their dasa and antardasa.
  (c) Another method :-Add lagna-sphuta ( degree of ascendant ) with the sphuta (degree) of the 7th lord. When Vrhaspathi in transit traverses through the 5th, 7th or 9th place from the newly found rasi and amsa marriage of the native is possible during that period.
  (d) There is another method :-Add together the sphuta of the planets indicated by the constellations ( Nakshatras) associated with Chandra and the 7th lord.
   When Vrhaspathi transits over the 5th, 7th or 9th place from that rasi and amsa the marriage of the native is posible.
  Planetary lordships indicated by different constellations or Naksbatras are as follows :-

172
3,	12,

IUMDU SCIBNCB OF THB FtrTURB

21 No. Nakshatras..are ruled by
"	.".	",.
"	"	"



Ravi Chandra Mangat
Rahu Vrhaspathi

8,	17,
9,	18,
10,	19,

26	,.	,.	..	"
27	"	,,	,,	,.
"	"

Sani Bud ha Ketu

II 20,   2   ,,	,,	,,	.,	Sukra.
   (e) Find out the rasi and amsa by addition of spbutas of lagnapathi, Sukra and the 7th lord. Marriage is possible when transit Vrhaspathi passes over that rasi and amsa.
(J) In the astbavarga Chakra ofSukra if the ra1i that contain¦
S or more Rekhas happens to be the 5th or 9th place from Chandra or Sukra situated in the birth chart and transit Vrhaspathi passes through that rasi marriage may occur during that period.
   (g) In asthavarga chakra of Sukra after Trikone and Ekadhipatya Sodhana ( reduction ) the number of digits that contain in the 7th rasi from the position of Sukra is to be multiplied by the Rekhas in the asthavarga chart of Sukra before reduction of Trikone and  Ekadhipatya  method& and the figure thus obtained is to be divided by 27. The remainder will be taken as number of Nakshatra. If the remainder is O (zero), or if the result obtained after multiplication referred to above is less than 27 the remainder will be taken as 27 Nakshatra i.e. Revati.
   When transit Vrhaspathi passes through that Nakshatra the marriage of the native is possible.
   There i a special rule to count number ofNakRhatra thus faund as remainder after division by 27. The rule is, if the native is horn during period of waxing moon counting of Nakshatra is to be made from A.swinl ; if it is the period of waning moon counting is to be made from Dhanistha Nakshatra,
Yogas of immorality, loose morals or bad character :
   We have already stated that the 7th house indicates marriage. sexual life and happiness. The house also indicates latent energies and general happiness in the family etc.

INDICATION OP BHAVA!I	173
   As the house represents sex and sex-life one's moral character may also be judged from this house. We suggest herebelow aome of the yogas that make a native licentious, and immoral and some of the favourable yogas may be there to give perfect happiness in married life.
   (1) If the lords of the 2nd and 6th are afflicted due to conjunction with or aspect by a malefic and occupy the 6th place from Jagna the native may be a person of loose morals.
   (2) The 7th lord occupying the lagna makes a man passionate and if that 7th lord is afflicted the native may be a man of loose morals.
   (3) Sukra in the 7th house makes a person extreme!:, passionate but Sukra and Budha together in the 7th house make him hunt after other's wife.
   (4) When in a birthchart 7th house is occupied by Sukra, Budha and Mangal the native is a man of perverted sex and is guilty of homo-sexuality.
   (5) H Rahu or Ketu is conjoined with the lord of the 7th house and is aspected by Mangal or Sani and also Sukra i• afflicted due to unfavourable position or aspect the native is notoriously immoral during the early period of his life.
   (6) So also, if Sukra in combination with lords of the 2nd, 6th and 7th occupies lagna the native will be a person of loose morals.
The author of Sarvarthachintamoni is of opinion :
(7) if the 7th place is occupied  by Mangal the native is a
debauch and enjoys many women, and
(i) if Ravi is posited in the 7th place the native indulges  in,
sexual act with woman or women related to him.
The author further says that
(ii) the native's moral character will  be loose if Rahu or
Ketu combines with the 7th lord and is aspected by a malefic.

   Yogas that make a person moral-minded and chaste in sexual llfe :
(1) Vrhaspathi when posited	in the 7th house with	no
malefi,c aspect makes the native strictly moral.
(2) The lord of lagna, or Chandra if situated in a fovourable·
rasi and  Navamsa,  occupies a Kendra and is aspected  by a

174	HINDU SCIBNCB OF THB FUTORB

benefic the native shall be a person of moral stamina nnd possesses high standard of personality.
   (3) When the 7th lord is in comhination with or i aspected by Vrhaspathi or the planet denoting the 7th bhava is aspected by or in conjunction with Vrhaspathi the native possesses a good moral character and his wife too is a pious person.
   There are persons who are not strictly speaking moral-minded but they lead faultless sex-lives. The lords of the 9th and the lagnapathi are primary factors in this matter. Even the afflicted 7th house and its lord and Sukra may not make the native unchaste in sex-matters if the 6th place, its lord, lagna, lagnadhipathi and Chandra are placed in favourable rasis and Navamsas and aspected by or conjoined with favourable planet. The beneficial result in this respect may be more certain if those planets endowed with merits are placed in Kendra position from lagna.
Good and honest wife or husband may be expected from the
following Yogas :
   (I)	The 7th lord when well-disposed, aspected by favourable planets or placed between benefics.
   (2) When the 7th lord is in favourable Navamsa and 10th lord is powerful and favourably disposed.
   3. Similarly when Sukra as the natural indicator of the 7th bhava is in favourable Navamsa and the 10th lord is strong.
   4. If the 7th lord is exalted, placed in his own or friendly house.
   .5. When the lord of the 7th house is strong and is conjoined with or aspected by Vrhaspathi the wife or the husband is pious and strictly observes religious rites.
   6. If the 7th lord or Ravi is placed in Makar Rasi (Capricorn) and is aspected by favourable planets and the 7th place is occupied by Vrhaspathi the wife or the husband is religious minded and very much faithful to life-partner.
   7. If Chandra is posited in a favourable rasi, Navamsa or is exalted the wife or the husband of the native is faithful to her or his life-partner and the native possesses good moral character.
   8. If the 7th lord or Karaka planet Sukra is well-disposed and powerful the same result is expected.
9,  If the 7th lord Sani is strong, well-disposed and is aspected

INDICATION OF BHAVAB	176

',by or combined with Vrhaspathi or with any other benefic planet the native becomes respectful to brahmins and gods and  tries to
·know Brahma.
   But if that Sani is in conjunction with Rahu or Ketu and is aspected by any other malefic and is also posited in 'Krura' (very malefic) Shastyamsa  the  native earns  bad  names and is
-quarrelsome, rude and rough.
    Other unfavourable Yogas regarding the 7th bhava Premature death of wife or husband :
1. If the 7th place is occupied by Rahu, 8th place by Sani
-&nd the 6th place· is occupied by Mangat, or Ravi is posited in the 10th place and Chandra in the 6th  premature death  of life­
.partner is possible.
   2. If the 7th place from lagna or Chandra is associated with a malefic planet the aforesaid result is expected.
3. Premature death of the husband or wife ( as the  case may
·be) is certain if Mangal in the 7th place is aspected by Sani. Only Mangal in the 7th place from lagnil may give the same unfavourable result.
Widowhood:
   Mangal in lagna, 4th, 7th, 8th or 12th house may bring about death of the husband ( or the wife ) of the native.
This is astrologically termed as Bhaum dosha.
   There are some renowned astrologers who are of opinion that Mangal in the 2nd place from lagna gives the same result.
   But this also is to be remembered that if Man gal inspite of his position in any of those unfavourable places acquires slfength in Vargas or by aspect of powerful benefics "bhaum dosba" may be neutralised.
The  following  yogas  also  indicate premature  death of
life partner, such as:-
   (a) When 8th lord is in an unfavourable Navamsa, the 7th house is occupied by a malefic and there is no benefic in the
: second house.
   (b) If a malefic planet is associated with the 81h house and  the  lord of the  8th house is posited in hi> own Navamsa.

1/6	BINDtJ SCIENCE OP THE PtJTURH
The following conftguration of planets nullify the yogas of widowhood.
(i) If the 8th lord is seated in the house of exaltation.
   (Ii) If the Navamsa lord of the ruler of the 8th	house is, posited in a malefic house and is also aspected by a malefic premature death of the husband or the wife of the native is no doubt indicated but if the 8th house in the natal chart is occupied and aspected by benefics the "bbaum dosha" i, nullified.
  (iii) If birthcharts of both husband and wife contain similar malefic yogas the 'bhaum dosha• is neutralised.
   (iv) If the 7th house is occupied by Sani and Mangal is posited in the 8th or Mangal and Sani are situated in the 4th place or if Sani is in lagna and Mangal is in the 12th place 'bhaum dosha' is neutralised.
   (v) 'Bhaum dosha' caused by Mangal being in any of the places such as 4th, 7th, 8th or 12th may be nullified if any one of those houses are occ,1pied by Sani or Rahu.


Determination of wife's ( or husband's ) Family Standard or Pedcgree :
   The complexion, caste, propriety of conduct, social rank, qualities etc. of husband or wife may be indicated by the 7th house and its lord. As for instance, say, a person's lagna falls. in Mina rasi, the lord thereof is Vrhaspathi who is a brahmin by caste. The 7th house from Mina rasi is Kanya, the lord is Budha who is Vaisya by caste. That is, the 7th lord belongs to a lower caste than brahmin. So, Bud ha will indicate the caste, complexion, merits etc. of the life-partner of the native. Sources of these qualities, merits or demerits are to be found from the position, strength and aspect over Budha. Generally complexion, graceful­ ness, countenance, physical structure of the wife or the husband of the native are to be judged from the 7th lord and the Navamsa lord or the Saptamadhipathi ( lord of the 7th house), This also is to be noted that aspect on or conjunction with the 7th lord by any other planet ·may definitely influence the findii:1g of the astrologer.
   (i) If the lagnapathi is weak and 6th house of the birthchart is the Navamsa rasi of the 7th lord, he ( 7th lord ) is debilitated.

INDIOATION OP BHAVAS	177
com bust or conjoined with a debilitated planet the bride of the native comes of a family of a comparatively lower standard.
  (ii) Similarly if the lord of lagna is weaker than the 7!h lord and he ( lagnapathi ) is debilitated, conjoined with malefics or posited in the 8th house the husband's family standard or pedegree is lower than the wife's.
Love marriage, Civil marriage and Intercaste marriage etc ;
   Love marriage, civil marriage or marriage with persons of different or prohibited caste may be judged from the 5th lord, Sukra and the lord of the 7th. Combination of Sani and Sukra, Sukra and Ravi or Mangal ha, a great role in this respect. But it is an admitted fact that love marriage comes within jurisdiction of the 5th house and its lord.
   Regarding interca•te marriage Maharshi Parasar says in his Vrihat Piiriisari Hora, 'when the waning moon occupies the 5th place, and the 7th and 12th houses are associated with malefic planets, the marriage with a person belonging to a iower or prohibited caste may occur.'
Conjugal life :
   The 7th places from lagna and Chandra and their lords and Karaka planet Sukra in case of a man, and Sukra and Mangat in case of a woman indicate the nature of conjugal life of the native.
  (a) If the 7th place is occupied by a malefic planet and if that planet is inimical to the 7th lord and the lord of lagna the conjugal life of the native is not expected to be happy and peaceful.
(bl  If Karaka planets{ viz., Sukra and Mangat ) are  in any
way afflicted there is remote chance for the native to enjoy peaceful conjugal life.
   (c) If the 7th bhava is occupied by its lord, receives aspect of a benevolent planet and also lord of the 7th bhava from either lagna or Chandra is favourably disposed the conjugal life of the native is expected to be happy.
   In short we may summarize the aforesaid rules in	the following manner :
Any given house is always 7th in relation to wif-,• vis-a-vis
which is in exact confrontation to it.
12

178	HINDU SCIENCE OP :I:HE FU:l:URB
   The husband's and wife's natal houses are thus inter.related and have to be judged in coojuoctioo with each other. The status, family, health, wealth, education etc. of the husband and the wife are mirrored in the first and the seventh. If any of them is governed or aspected by au evil planet the disparities and afflictions should follow. Favourably governed and favourably aspected the rc•ults would be happy.

Occupation of pl11Dets in the 7th hhava and results thereof:
Ravi in the 7th house :
   (!) If the 7th house is occupied by Ravi the wife of the native may be barren, he will wander hither and thither aimlessly and may suffer humiliation. According to Parasari Hora conjugal life of the native will remain disturbed if Ravi occupies the 7th house.
Chandra In the 7th house :
   (2) If the waning moon is in the 7th house the wife of the native will be unfaithful but if that moon is aspccted by a powerful beoefic the wife of the native will be virtuous and faithful to the husband.
   If the full or waxing moon is posted in the 7th bhava and a benefic planet casts his aspect on Chandra the native will be beautiful to look at, will be loved by beautiful damsels and will be exceedingly lovely.
   According to Parasari Hora waxing or full moon in the 7th house makes a man happy, learned and wealthy.
Mangal In the 7th house :
   (3) When Mangal occupies the 7th bhava the wife in case of a male and the husband in Cdse of a female dies premature death. Maharshi Parasar says that the native shall serve low class people and his wife will not Iive long.
Dudha in the 7th House :
   (4) When strong Budha .is situated in the 7th house the native will be learned, wiil always like good and beautiful dress, his wife will be artistic, fortunate and rich. Weak Budha when afflicted will be the cause of unhappy conjugal life.

INDICATION OP BIUVAS	179
Vrbaspatbl in the 7th house :
   (5) Vrhaspathi occuping the 7th house will make the native happy, wise and benevolent. The native will have a beautiful lucky, faithful and virtuous wife. His children also will be highly educated and lucky.
   If debilitated Vrhaspathi be in the 7th house the native will lose his wife. If Sani is posited in the 7th bhava identical with Mina rasi the result will be the same.
   If Vrhaspathi occupies a rasi or Navamsa owned by Sani or Mangal the Native may have illicit relation with other women.
   But Mantreswar in his Phaldipika holds a different view, he is of opinion that it is Sukra ( not Vrhaspathi) who will give the malefic result as stated ahove. If the planet occupying 7th house is in a Varga of Mangal or Sani the native may have a liason with other people's wife.
Sukra in the 7th house :
   (6) If the 7tb. house is occupied by strong Sukra the wife of the native will enjoy happy conjugal life and sb.e will be highly prosperous. But afflicted Sukra in the 7th house makes a man licentious and unhappy,
Sani in the 7th house :
   (7) Conjugal life of the native will not be peaceful if Sani is in th 7th house, but when Sani in the 7th house occupies his exalted, own or mooltrikona sign the conjugal life will be happy, An afflicted Sani or Sani in conjunction with or aspected by a malefic planet or if posited in an inimical house identical with 7th bhava will give the native immense trouble in his domestic environment, his wife may be quarrelsome, peevish and he himself will be roaming aimlessly and distressed,
Rabu in the 7th house :
   (8) If Rahu occupies the 7th house the person concerned will lose his wealth through intrigues with women, sutfer separation from his near and dear ones, he may be obstinate and silly.
Ketu lo the 7th house :
   (9) If Ketu is posited in the 7th house the native will be humiliated, seek the company of women of bad repute, will suffer from disease of intestine, his wife will be sickly, and he will lose his vital power.

180	IDNDU SCIENCE OF THE Fl!TURB
Occapation of the 7th lord in different bhavas 11,ur
results thereof
   I¦ tile first house-If the 7th lord occupies lagna the native may :.ave intrigues with women other than his wife, he may be a man of loose morals, he will have sharp intellect, will be prudent
,nLl skilful and may suffer from rheumatism or gout ; parti­ cul.rl.y if lagna rises in Vrscika rasi and the 7th lord is in lagna the ,,ative may be a man of loose morals. If Mangat or Rahuis in the 7th house and Sukra in Vrscika rasi where lagna is situated the aative may be a debauch. Similar result may be predicted when lagna falls in Tula rasi and Sukra in conjunction with Sam, Mangal or Rahu occupies the 7th house.
(11 the second house'-The  native has procrastinating  habit,
:rnd is financially affluent. The native may be a henpecked husba::td. If the seventh lord is Sukra favourable result noted above will be very effective. This may be the case in case of Mesa a11d Vrscika lagna. In other lagnas monetary affl:uence will be mediocre. In Mesa lagna Sukra in combination with Vrhaspathi and Mangal, occupying the 2nd house is a "Yogakaraka.. pla11et. and the native becomes a very rich man.
   In the third house-If the fifth house and its lord and karaka ph,1et Vrhaspathi are not favourable and the 7th lord occupies the Jrd hou•e the native's childr n may be shortlived and his wife may give birth to still-born child. If the fifth house and its lord are strong and well-disposed the unfavourable resutt said above should not be expected.
   If the 7th lord seated in the 3rd house is combust the wife of tile n&tive may be shortlived and sickly.
   lit the fourth house-No happiness in conjugal life, tooth disease etc. The native will be truthful and virtuous. He may do well in business (trade) if the 7th lprd is not afflicted but aspected by a favourable planet.
   lo tlae fifth house-The native will be meritorious,. wealthy, cileerful and happy. The favourable result may be very much effective in case of Mithuna lagna when the 7th lord Vrhaspathi in .combination with Sukra is posited in the 5th house, and also in case of Vrscika lagna when the 7th lord Suba andVrhaspathi "re po,it d in the 5th place from lagna.

INDIGATION OF BHAVAB	l81
   In the sixth and eighth houses-The wife of the native w1ll be sickly, he himself will be peevish, irrit b_le and unhappy. His business enterprise may be unsuccessful until and unles,; a favourable planet casts his aspect on the 7th house or its lord. The native may be attacked with any kind of disease in intestine or abdomen.
   In the seventh house-If the 7th lord occupies the 7th house the native enjoys happy conjugal life, his wife will be faithful and pious. If the 7th lord is in conjunction with Rahu, Sani and Mangal his wife may be uncontrollable, haughty and unchaste. She may be involved in an accident.
In the ninth house-Please see the result of the position ,r 7th
lord in the 2nd house. Only difference is that the native rn:,y be benefited by his wife or her parents and shall be lucky.
   In the tenth house-The native will be truthful, pious aud happy. If lagna rises in Mithuna, Dhanu or Mina and the 7tll lord is situated in the 10th house the native will be highly educated, will build his own career by dint of his own merit and
effort and shall wield pomp and power. In case of Mesa lagna the 7th lord being in the 10th house will not be so favourable a,
other three lagnas mentioned above if the ninth lord Vrh,"P"thi is not favourably disposed.
   In the eleventh honse-The native's conjugal life will be unhappy, his children may be shortlived unless the fifth lord and the house are strong.
   In the twelfth house-Indication of loss of domestic peace. If the 4th lord and the bhava are favourable, family peace may be restored occasionally ; bad health of wife, short journe,y etc. are indicated.

CHAPTER-VIII
THE EIGHTH HOUSE

   The 8th house is the house of longivity. It covers the span of life.  According to Hindu theory the beginning of life herehelow is the beginning  of the  barrier between the individual soul and God. In other words life begins when the individual soul starts off the Universal soul to masquerade for its allotted span as an individual-the non-spiritual elements, though themselves also ultimately and basically spiritual-acting as the comouflage to obviously spiritual past.
   Sorrow, affliction, vicissitudes of forces are the inevitable incidents to a life on earth and it is from the 8th house that all these have to be calculated. In pessimistic language, the house represents also the house of action.  For, action is the source of all vicissitudes of fortunes.
   The seventh house is described as the house of destruction. The 7th from the 8th house is the 2nd from lagna and the lord of the 2nd is therefore, indicated as the killer. According to this theory the 6th house attitude (i.e. the 6th bhava) is the house of sorrow an<i affliction. The house which destroys the 6th house attitude ( bhava ) is the 12th ( the house of destruction of the 6th i.e. the house of sorrow and affliction ) which has been described as the house of salvation or release. The individual soul merges into the Universal soul, its sojourn on earth is completed. Superficially therefore, the 6th house and the 8th give nearly the same rc ult.  From the 8th the life span is calculated; a few specific rules are to be found in Parasari Hora, Jaimini, and other standard treatises.
   According to the famous treatise viz., Parasari Hora the first 24 years of life should be calculated mainly from the point of view of the dangers that beset it. Life during this period need• extra protection from these dangers, It comes into stride after these daugers are got over. The dangers are called 'Aristha' of which there are three kinds, viz., (1) Pataki, (2) Graha-ristha and (3) Ganda•ristha.

INDICATION OP BHAVAS	183
   Bala•ristba : The risthas that endanger a child are termed as biila-ristb.a. Some of the biilii-ristha yogas are mentioned here:
   I. If Rahu is situated in the 8th house from lagna with Mangal and Sani the child may be involved in an accident and the leg and hand of the child may be badly injured.
   2. If Ravi in the 7th or 8th house is hemmed in between three malefics and Vrhaspathi or Sukra is not posited in any of those places the child may be killed by a four-footed animal.
   3, If Budha in his inimical house is aspected by or associated with any enemy planet and Chandra occupies the 6th or 8th house the child may be killed by any aquatic animal.
   4. If the 8th place from lagna is occupied by Manl!lll an.i Chandra, and if that 8th place is their enemy house the child may die of snake-bite.
   5. If Vrhaspathi and Bud ha are in the 6th place which is also their enemy house the child may be attacked by his enemy and may meet with death.
   6. If Ravi occupies Simha lagna and Sani is in the 12th place the child may be blind.
   7. If Ravi is in the 8th place from lagna, Chandra in the 6th dan Soni is situated in the 12th the n.ative may be blind.
   8. If any house is occupied by 6 planets the native may be bereft of happiness and mental peace, and the native may be a man of •uspicious mind and crazy.
   9. If Chandra and Sani together are posited in Karkata ( Cancer ) the native becomes lame,
   'Kshana' a mythological figure said to be vastly loamed in astrology pronounced that while these two planets ( Char.dra and Sani) occupy Karkata rasi Sani makes the native lame.
   10, If Ravi in his inimical house is conjoined with Mangal and Chandra without receiving any aspect from Sukra the child becomes·an one-eyed person,
   11,  The longivity of the child may be about 8 months only if lagna is associated with Mangal, Rahu aspects the 4th place and the 2nd or 12th house is occupied by Sani.
   12. In a child's birth-chart if 12th place is occupied by Ravi and Mangat, lagna by Chandra and Sani, and at the same time the lagna is aspected by an unfavourable planet the child dies a premature death.

184	HINDU BCIBNCE OF THE PUTURE

   13. The child dies prematurely when configuration of planets in his birth chart is as follows :
  Chandra, Mangal and Sani occupy lagna, Ravi is situated in the 9th place and there is no aspect of Vrhaspathi on lagna.
   14. This is alsc, a sign of premature death if in the birthchart of a child Ravi and Mangal arc positioned ir. the 3rd house, 8th house is occupied by Sani and Jagna remains unaspccted by either Vrhaspathi or Sukra. In such a case the maximum period of longivity is about a month.
   15. If malefic planets are posited in the 8th house and the 6th place is occupied by Chandra, and lagna is not aspected by either Vrhaspathi or Sukra the child does not live more than a year.
   16. The following yogas bring about premature death of a child :
   (i) if lagna is occupied by Mangal who is aspected by a malefic planet and remains unaspected by a bcnefic.
   (ii) when Sani in conjunction with Mangat remains unaspected by a beneficial planet and occupies the 7th place from lagna.
   (iii) Ravi in conjunction with Mangal when posited in the Sth house may kill the child in its early life.
(iv) Sani in association with Mangal is seated either in the
6th or 8th place and is not aspected by a favourable planet.
   I7. When 6th or 8th place falls in Karkata rasi and Budha is there and he is aspccted by Chandra the child's longivity is about 4 years.
   18. If the 8th place falls in Mesa or Vrscika rasi and Vrhaspathi is aspccted by Ravi, Chandra, Mangal and Sani and remains unaspectcd by Sukra the child dies at the age of 3 years.
   19. If the 6th, 8th or 12th house from lagna falls in Karkata or Simha rasi associated with Sukra and the aforesaid house is aspected by all malefic planets the child dies at the age of 6 years.
   20. If Sani conjoined with and aspected by a malefic planet is situated in lagna apd there is no aspect of favourable planet on Sani the child dies at the age of 16 years.
   (i) If that Sani ( when conjoined with and aspected by a malefic planet) is only associated with unfavourable planets and

INDIOA!rION OF BHAVAS	185
is not aspected by a favourable planet the child dies within a month.
(ii) If  that Sani  is  aspected  by  both  favourable  and
.unfavourable planets the child may die within first one year of Hs age.
   21. If Mesa or Vrscika rasi is the 6th, 8th or angular place ( kendra) from lagna and retrograde Sani is seated at any of those signs and is also aspected by powerful Mangal the child dies within 2 years of its age.
22. If at birth Sani, Ravi and Chandra together  are posited
in a house the child dies after its birth. Thts is called 'Sani-ristha'.
   23. If Chandra associated with a malefic planet and aspected by even a favourable planet is posited in lagna, 7th or 9th place the child does not survive long.
   24. If Simha. Vrscika or Kumbha lagna rises and Rahu in fagna is aspected by many (at least three) malefics the child may
-die at the 7th year of age.  This is called 'Rahu-ristha',
   25, If Rahu and Budha together are aspected by a piipa and are posited in a kendra from lagna the child may die at the 10th year of age.
   26. If waning mnon associated with lagna and malefics without receiving aspect of any favourable planet is situated in a kendra or the 8th house the child dies a premature death.
27,  Even a benefic if aspected by an unfavourable planet
-occupies the 6th or 8th house the child dies at a very early age.
  28. If Chandra occupies lagna and Mangal is in the 7th house from lagna it is a ristha yoga for the child and its parents.
   29. If lagna is occupied by Chandra and the 7th house by Rahu the child may die at its 4th year of age.
   30. If Mangal being placed in the navamsa of Chandra is poaited in the 7th house from lagna and remains unaspected by
.any benefic the;;child dies in the period when Chandra traverses the 77th nal<shatra from Janma nakshatra ( birth star i.e. the nakshatra associated with Chandra at the time of birth ).
   (a) Similarly the child dies when Chandra traverses the 77th oakshatra from Janma .nakshatra if Ravi, Mangat and Sani a:e posited in the 5th place.

186	HINDU SOIENOB OP THE nnuBB

   31, If in the Navamsa chakra Mangal is situated in a rasr which is the Jata-lagna ( i.e. lagna of the birthchart) and Mangal in the birthchart is not aspected by Vrhaspathi, Or
   (a) If Chandra is posited in the 5th house from lagna and occupies Mangal's Navamsa and i_s not aspected by Vrhaspathi early death of the child is indicated.
   32. Death is possible due to snake bite if Rahu in conjunction with Mangal is posited in the 8th house.
   Combination of these two planets in the 8th house may also cause death by poison.
   But if Rahu is favoured by a benefic the malefie result to some extent may be mitigated. This is also to be noted that the native himself is responsible for loss of domestic peace if in his birth chart Rahu occupies the 8th place from lagna.
   33. If Chandra and malefic planets occupy any Kendra and lagna acquires "Chandra Hora" and the 1,aby is born at any Sandhya Kala or at Gandanta there is chance of danger of life of the child.
   •At the time of sunset upto 3 dandas ( I.e. 1 hr, 12 min.} after disappearance of half of the disc of the sun is Swayam Sandhya Kala.
   At the time af sunrise upto 3 dandas after appearance of holf of the disc of the sun in the sky is called Prata Sandhya kiila.
   34. In the native's birth chart if lagna falls in Vrscika rasi and 'krura grahas' ("Krura" means cruel. Ravi, Mangal and Sani are termed as 'Krura grahas', "Grahas" means planets) are situated within the first part of the birth chart and favourable planets occupy last part the child must die a premature death.
   Ganda: The beginning of Aswini Nakshatra or the last S dandas of Revati Nakshatra is termed as Swaganda. In case or birth of a child with "Swaganda" during Swayarn or Prata Sandhyakii.la the child will die,
  If the baby is born with Pitri-ganda the father and if it is Matri-gaoda the mother dies.
• ( Pitri, Matri 11nd Swa-ganda  will be explained  in due
course ),
(a)  If there  is  birth  during Swa-ganda caused by Aswini
Nakshatra the baby dies within first 10 months.

INDICA ION OF BHAVAS	187

  (b) If it is Revati Nakshatra's ( Swa-ganda) ganda death of the baby is possible within the first 21 years of age.
   (cl If it is Aslesha's Swa-ganda within the first one year of age the child dies.
(d) If it is Magha's ganda within first 4 or 8 years of age of
the child the mother dies.
(e) If it is Jestha's ganda within first I1/2 years of age and if it
is Moola's ganda within the first 6 years of a!,e the father dies. Ganda-ristha may be classified in the following manner :.
Birth at day time-Pitri gaoda :.
The first 3 dandas of Moola Nakshatra The last 5 dandas of Jestha Naksbatra
Birth at night-Matri-Ganda :-
The first 3 dandas of Magha Nakshatra The last 5 dandas of Aslesha Nakshatra
Birth at the junction of day and night and night and day :.
This is swa-ganda i.e.  ristha of the baby itself.
The beginning of Aswini Nakshatra The last 5 dandas of Revati Nakshatra.
  The total of these is 108. This is generally taken to be"' man's longivity.
1".aukicihalcr&

Mitbuqa.z.O	Vrsa 6 Mesa 10
K.arkata S f:-------,l''---71E	'k- Mina 4
iimla 8	'---+--4:-- K.umbha 3

Mat-ar14




   Look at the diagram drawn above. Three perpendicular lines parallel to each other are cut horizontally by three parallel .

· 188	HlllDU SCIBNCB OP THB FUTURE
lines. There will be 12 intersecting points. The first point is Mesa, the 2nd is Vrsa, etc.; in this method we shall find 12 rasis. '-low Mesa is joined by a line with Kanya, Vrsa with Simha, Mithuna with Karkata rasi. Again Mesa is to be joined by a line with Mina, Vr•a with Kumba, Mithuna with Makar rasi. Similarly Mina is to be joined by a line with Tula, Kumba with Vrscika, and Makar is to be joined with Dhanu. We know the Rasi where lagna is situated.
   Herc also in the Pataki chakra lagna is to be shown in that rasi.
   This is also to be noted from the diagram that each rasi is joined with other two rasis, such as :-Mina and Dhanu are joined with Karkata, Kumbha and Vrscika with Simha, Makar and Karkata with Dhaou, Dhaou and Kanya with Makar, Mina, Kanya and Dhanu with Mesa, Vrscika, Simha, and Kumbha with Vrsa and lastly Makar, Karkata and Tula with Mithuna.
Each rasi contains a digit in the following manner:-
Mesa 10, Vrsa 6, Mithuna 20, Karkata 5, Simha 8, Kanya 2,
Tula 20, Vrscika 6, Dhanu 10, Makar 14, Kumbha 3 and Mina 4. Total of these digits is 108.. This is generally taken to be a
·man's longivity.
   Pataki chakra will indicate ristha period of the child. This will be dealt with later on.  Before we explain  this we shall
,have to discuss some other important matters.
   First of all ylimardha-pathi and Danda-Pathi are to be worked out. There arc Diva-yiimiirdhapathi and Ratri yamiirdha-pathi.
.Diva means day, Ratri means night.
Diva yamardha :
   In any  almanac ( Panjika) the span of a day and  night is mentioned. One-eighth of a day or night is the span of each yamardha and one-fourth of each yiimiirdha is the span of each
<landa.
   In case of birth of the child at day time yiimiirdha-pathi is to be determined in the following manner :
  The lord of the birthdate is the first yiimiirdhapathi of that date, i. . if the birth date is Sunday, Ravi is the lord of that date, if it is Monday Chandra is the lord of that date, if it is Tuesday Mangat is the lord of that date etc.

INDICATION OF BRAVAS	189•
So, if the birth date is Sunday
the first yiimiirdhapathi is  Sun i.e. Ravi.
the second
the third,.
.,6th planet from
,,	,,	,.Ravi
2nd
yamiirdhapathithe fourth
the fifth the sixth,,
,,
,,,,
,,
,,,..
,,
,,
,,
,,3rd
4th 5th,,
,.
,,"
.,the seventh,,•>,,,,6th,,.,the eighth,,,,,,,,7th,,,,   In case of birth at n igl,t different method is followed. Here too we are to find out from	almanac the span of night as the child is born at night. It is needless to mention here taat one-eighth of the span of the birth night is the span of each yiimiirdha hnd each danda is equivalent to one-fourth of each yiimiirdha. Now method of determining yiimiirdhapathi is a follows:
  The lord of birthdate is the first yiimiirdhapathi-that is if the birth date is Sunday the first yiimiirdhapathi is Ravi.
   The fifth planet from the first yiimiirdhapathi is the second· yiimardhapathi. The fifth planet from the 2nd yiimiirdhapathi is the third yiimiirdhapathi and so on.
   The diagrams of both yiimardhapathi and dandapathi are given in the last part of this book which will serve as a ready reckoner.
Method of finding out Daodapatbl :
   ( Here also method is different in case of birth at dar and at night J.
When the child ls born at day time
   The first yamiirdhapathi is the lord of first danda. As for· instance if the birth date is Wednesday, the first yiimardhapathi is Budlta. So, the first dandapathi also is Budha.
   Budha is the fourth planet from Ravi. The second dandapathi is one-half of the figure 4, which denotes Chandra.
   The third dandapathi is the one-half of figure obtained by Chandra, ( Chandra is 2 from Ravi. So, half of 2 is 1 which means Ravi ) which is .Ravi.
  The fourth dandapathi is Rahn. Herc spc ciat rule is followed­ If one-half of the figure thus found is not a round figure t.e. there

190	HIN DU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE

is something as 21/2 or 31/2 the round figure is accepted and part of the round figure is to be omitted. Such as, say the first dandapathi is Vrhaspathi which denotes 5 ( counted from Ravi],
i of 5 is 21/2 ; here the round figure 2 is acceptable, which means
Chandra.
   If half of the figure obtained by a dandapathi is not a round figure it will b, considered as O (zero) which means Rahu,
In case of birth at night the method is easier.
The first yamardhapathi is the lord of first danda.
   The second dandapathi is the 6th planet from	the first dandapathi.
   The third dandapathi is the 6th planet from the second dandapathi.
  To illustrate-if thefirst dandapathi is Ravi, second danda­ pathi is Sukra, the third dandapa1hi is Budha etc.
How to determine Pataki-ristha ?
   We have seen that in the Pataki Chakra there are 12 rasis and each rasi is joined with other two rasis by a line. The intersecting points are called 'Veda·sthanas'.
For instance, Karkata rasi is joined with Dhanu and Mina.
These two intersecting points, viz., Dhanu and Mina are 'Veda­ thans' of Karkata i.e. if lagna is in Karkata rasi its Veda-sthana are Dhanu and Mina.
   If dandapathi is posited in any those two rasis ( Dhanu and Mina) the native is born with 'Pataki•ristha'. The digits in these three rasis [Karkata, Dbanu and Mina) are 5, 10:& 4 respectively.
   The native may fall badly ill during 4, 5, 10 days, months or years of age provided during any of those ages there is unfavourable dasa and antardasa. The result may be modified under special circumstances which will be discussed later on.
  While considering Pataki-ristila the following points are to be noted very carefully :
   I. If the dandapathi posited in Veda-sthana is a natural malefic and there is no aspect of any strong favourable planet on lagna, or lagna is not in.association with an}'._ benefic the child may die within the d1ys denoted by digits in Veda-stbana.
2.  If lagna is conjoined with or aspected by both malefic and

INDICATION OF BHAVAS	191
benefic planets the child may die within the months or years instead of days as reckoned.by digits in Vcda-sthanas.
   Please note that each rasi has three Veda-sthanas and there arc three digits. Ristha period will be those three digits and also total of those three digits.
   We have seen in the aforesaid i!lustration that digits in Karkata, Dhanu and Mina arc 5, 10 and 4 respectively. The total of these three numbers is 19.  Hence, ristha period may be 5, 10, 4 and 19 days, months or years as the case may be.
   If the dstha is very unfavourable and there is no protective factor against that ristha the child may die within days mentioned above. Again inspite of one or two protective factors if the ristha is more forceful the child may die within months or years instead of days.
   There will also be a ristba if dandapathi is posited in Vedasthana from Chandra.
Wbat are protecthe factors ?
   l. lf dandapathi is weak and there are both unfavourable and beneficial relation with lagna or lagnapathi.
   2. If the lagna is in "Vargottom Navamsa" or lagnapathi is posited in his highest exaltation-point.
3. If Vrhaspathi and Sukra are situated in Kendra.
   4. If the lord of the birth.day is the dandapathi and he is seated in Vcdasthan from lagna or Chandra there will be no ristha inspite of the malefic nature of dandapathi.
   [ Lord of the birthday means-if the baby is born on Sunday the lord of the birthday is Ravi. In this manner the lord of birthday is to be determined ]
   Under those circumstances the child may avert the crisis arising out of ristba. There are also other favourablc yogas that may save the Jive of the child inspite of 'Pataki' or other risthas which will be discussed later on.
Pltrl•ristba :
   Pitri ristha means that kind of ristha that may endanger the life of the child's father.
Ravi signifies father and Chandra mother.
   1. If these planets are situated between malcfics, or associated with or aspected by malefics parents may die,

192	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE PU:WllE

   2. If Sani is situated in lagna, Mangat in the 7th place and Chandra in the 6th house from lagna this is a death inflicting yoga for the father of tbe child.
   3. If Vrhaspathi occupies lagna and the 2nd house is conjoined with Sani, Ravi, Mangat and Budha the father may die at the time of marriage of the child.
   4. If the baby is born in the navarnsa rasi of Mangat and lagna is aspected by Ra vi and Sani the father dies before the birth of the child.
   5. If Rahu and Vrhaspathi being in their inimical house occupy lagna or the 4th place from lagna the father dies at the child's 23rd year of age.
   6. If the 6th or 8th house from lagna is occupied by Chandra, Mangat and Sani who are not aspected by Vrbaspathi the yoga may prove fatal tor both the child and the father.
   7. Within 7 days from the birthdate of the child the father may die if the 8th place is occupied by Chandra, the 2nd place by Vrhaspathi and Rahu and the 4th place is occupied by Sani and Mangat.
   8. If Ravi is aspected by three malefics without any aspect of any beneficial planet on Ravi or he ( Ravi ) is not associated with any favourable planet the yoga may endanger the life of the father,
   9. If Mangal is placed in the 8th house and the 12th place is occupied by three unfavourable planets without being aspccted by or conjoined with any beneficial planet is also a fatal yoga for the father.
10. This is also a ristha yoga for both the child and the
father if Ravi is in the 8th place and Rahn is in lagna.
   11. This is also a latal yoga for the father if Ravi and Mangal ar conjoined with each other and aspected by Sani or Ra vi and Sani together are posited in a house and aspected by Mangal.
Matri-ristha :
   1. If Chandra is-aspected by three malefics and the 6th place from Chandra is occupied by an inauspicious planet the mother of the child meets with death.
2. If Chandra being in conjunction with and aspected by

INDICATION OP BRA.VAS	193

malcfics is posited in the 7th or 8th place from any other unfavourable planet or is aspected by a powerful malefic the mother of the child dies.
This is also a Matri-ristha yoga if the Kendra position is
not occupied by a favourable planet and the 4th place from Chandra ( if that house is inimical to Chandra) is occupied by a malefic.
3. If the malefic planets are poaited in the 4th, 6th, 10th and
12th places from lagna life of the mother and the father may be in danger.
4. When the birth of the child happens to be at  night, and
both. Cb.andra and Su.kra arc situated in a malefic b.ouse or houses and tb.ey are also conjoined with other unfavourable planets the mother dies within 6 months from the birthdate of the child.
   S. If Sani and Mangat together ( in any rasi ) are in the same navamsa and occupy Kendra position from Chandra the mother dies in the baby'• childhood and the child is looked after by a stepmother.
   6. From waning moon if the 5th and 9th places are occupied by malefic planets only the mother dies within 6 months from the birthdate of the child.
7. If Chandra is hemmea in between Sani and Mangal or is
in conjunction with them the mother dies.
   8. If the 4th place from lagna or Chandra is occupied by a powerful malefic and the Kendra position from that malefic ii occupied by another strong unfavourable planet the mother dies.
   9. The mother of the baby dies within 8 days from its birth if lagna falls in Mina and navamsa lagna be in Karkata, and Ravi and Sukra being in Kumbha rasi are aspected by Sani.
   10. If Kendra and trikona houses are occupied by malefics tb.e mother dies.
   11. If Chandra conjoined with aoy evil planet is posited in 6th or 8th house and Mangal occupies the 7th. place from lagna the mother meets with death.
   12. If the 4th place from lagna or Chandra is occupied by a powerful @alefic and tb.e Kendra position from that malefic is occupied by another strong unfavourable planet the mother dies.
13

194	HINDU SOIENOII OF :CllE FUTURE
  13. If Chandra is hemmed in between Sani and Mangal or is in conjunction with them the mother dies.
   ,v. B. '.'"hough Chandra has an important role in determining the 'ristba' of the baby's mother the fourth house and ita lord are no less important.

Ilala-ristha ( early death of the child ) :
   ( This part of biilii-ristha should be read along with the ristba yogas explained earlier in this chapter )
   Primarily Eighth hou, • indicates Ayu or Longivity, but that is not all. The house also signifies litigation, victory over or defeat by enemies, imprisonment, domestic troubles, worries and anxieties, abdomen and pelvic region of the body, rectum, secret organ, legacies, unearned wealtJ:,, wills, disgrace and  degradation, cause of death, place and surroundings of death.

Occupation of the 8th Lord in different bhavu and results
thoreof:
   1. If the 8th lord occupies lagna or the 7th place from lagna the wife or the husband may die a premature death and the native m y marry again.
Remarriage  depends  on  many  factors which  must  be
considered before the final judgment is pronounced,
   The 8th lord in lagna may be the cause of immense trouble, such as, the native may be possessing very bad health, he will have no easy walk of life.
   2. If the 8th  lord is posited in the 2nd pie.cc -the native cannot acquire good wealth and he cannot restore his lost property.
   The 2nd place is 'marakasthan' ( death inflictin11 house ), So if the 8th lord is ituated in the 2nd place the native may fall badly ill during dasa-bhukti of the 2nd lord under the m jor period of the lord of the 8th house. Besides, the native may suffer from some sort of ailments in throat.
3. Relation between brothers and sisters may  be strained if
the 6th lord occupies the 3rd house. Health of brothers and sisters may not run well.

INDIOATION OF BHAVAS	195

   4. Position of the 8th lord in the 4th or 10th house is deemed to be very bad. The native may be mean-minded, malicious and jealous of others. His parents may die in bis childhood. There may be ups and down in his vocational career and mental peace may remain disturbed.
   5. When the 8th lord is posited in the 5th house the native may not be a man of sharp intellect unless any one of Budha and Vrhaspathi is powerful and favourably posited in Kendra
,or Kona.
   6. If the 8th lord occupies the 6th place the native will be 1iickly, there is danger of Snakebite and also fear from water in his childhood.
7. If the 8th lord occupies the 8th house and the house
itself is his ( 8th lord's ) exalted or own sign the native may live long, but if the said 8th lord is conjoined with or aspected by a malefic, or acquires unfavourable Sasthyamsa
{ one-sixtyeth part of a rasi-see the table ) the native may be shortlived.
   8. The 8th lord in the 9th house ( house of luck ) is awefully bad. The native can not thrive well in life, he may be a sinful man, unscrupulous, always hankers after other's wealth and wife, or he may be barren or childless.
   9. If the 11th house is occ,1pied by the 8th lord his relatives may be hostile to him and he may not have cordial relations with his elder brothers or sister. Of course all these depend on the strength and favourable position of the 3rd lord. Again, if the 3rd house is occupied by a benefic and its lord is well­ posited the unfavourable result may be ameliorated to a great extent.
   10. If the 8th lord in conjunction with a natural malefic is posited in the 12th place the native may be shortlived, this also may be the case if the 6th lord also be in the 12th place.
   11. The 8th lord when posited in the 11th will not be favourable for the native to earn as much money as in case of other lords but if the 2nd and 11th lords or/and houses are favourable the native may earn a lot by unscrupulous means particularly when the 8th lord bemg a natural malefic occupies the  11th  house.  Again if  the house of gain ( 11th ) is not

196	Hl!IDU SCIENCE OF THE l"UTURB
afflicted and the 8th lord be in  the 11th the native may get
wealth or property by inheritance.
   12. 1f the 8th lord is Sukra and the planet is associated with or related to a naturally inauspicious planet the native may be attacked with kidney trouble, ailments due to inflammation of prostate gland or any other urinary trouble, such as diabetes, In case the native is a woman besides urinary trouble referred to­ above she may suffer from uterine disease or disease of the. ovary, If that Sukra is conjoined with or aspected by Manga the native may have to undergo surgical operation due to an)I of those diseases.
   The 8th lord being in conjunction with Mangat or simila1 other cruel planets may be the cause of disease of the anus 01 rectum ( such as piles, fissure etc. ).
   The com bina!lon of the 8th lord and Mangat, or association or the 8th lord with the lord of the 6th house may be the caus orinvolvement into litigation, imprisonment or debt.
  Combination of or relation between the lords of 8th and 6th houses arc not always unfavourable, rather the native may pass over many hardies that beset him or her in his ( or her ) career and prosper in life provided they are not aspected by or related to any other bhava Lord ( excepting the lord of the. 12th house ), so says Uttarkalamrita and Parasari Hora.
   Again if the 8th house is occupied by more than one malicioui. planet the native may suffer from diseases of anus or rectum and there is possibility of his suffering from enlargement oflcrotum.
Unbappy or painful end of life
   l,	If the 8th lord is in Pasa or Sarpa Drekkan the native, may die of snake bite or may commit suicide by hanging.
   ( The 1st and the last drekkan of Karkata, Vrscika and Mina. raais are termed as Pasa or Sarpa drekkan ),
   2. If the 8th house or the lord is aspected by any powerful. planet the native may die due to disease caused by that planet.. (It may be noted that Ravi and Mangal indicate bile, Chandra. rheumatism, wind and.phlegm, Budba indicates bile aud phlcgw. Vrhaspathi	phlegm,	Sukra	Pneumatics and	phlegm, Saui pneumatics and  rheumatism, and Rahu  signifies pneumatics..
only ),

INDICATION 01!' BHAVAB	197

The native may die when the humour indicated:by dealh­
-inllicting planet is irritated or the state of the bodily humours become unbalanced.
(a) If the 8th place is aspected by Ravi death due to fire,
(b) If the 8th place is aspect.ed by Chandra watery disease,
(c) If the 8th  place is aspected  by Mangal death may be
caused by any kind of weapon, or surgical operation.
   (d) If that house is aspected by Budha it may be a serious. type of fever that cannot be easily diagonised,
(e) If Vrhaspathi is the cause of death the suffering will ho
<iue to cough and cold or any such disease relating to phlegm
or digestive organ.
3. If the waning Chandra be posited in the 8th place and ia
:aspected ( dristha )  by  powerful Sani the  native may  ,·He  of
disease of anus, eye or any wound caused by a weapon.

Planets in the Eighth house
   Astrological savants are of opinion that there should not be any planet favourable or unfavourable, in the 8th house. Because any planet whether he is a natural Subha ( benefic) or asubha ( malefic) may produce unfavourable result in one way or other. This is also a fact that the standard of beneficial or malicious result depends on the nature and strength of each planet. There is no doubt about it that the result will vary according to strength of planets positing in the 8th house.

Ravi In the 8th house
   I, It is needless to repeat here that Ravi signifies father, soul, head, nobility etc. (please see the Karakata chapter). When he is situated in the 8th house the native may suffer from bilious ailments, he may lack personality, vitality, energy and vigour, because Ravi naturally stands for energy, vitality, pomp, grandeur, greatness and nobility.  Naturally when this planet is in the Rth house he will be afflicted, in consequence the native will be narrow-minded, mentally weak and sickly, he may die of epilepsy, paralysis or sunstroke. An afflicted Ravi may be the cause of loss of brain power.
When Ravi occupies the 8th house and is aspected by Sani

198	HINDU SOIENOE OF THE P'UTUBB
and there is no aspect of any benefic on Ravi the native under that circum•tance will pass through many vicissitudes of life. may suffer from worries and anxieties almost all through his life. His professional career may be adversely effected.
In a female horoscope the planet seated in the 8th house may
cause widowhood.

Chandra in the 8th honse
   2. Chandra represents mother, mind,	lungs	nutrition. morality, etc.  If the planet is situated in the 8th house the native is likely to be sickly, his mother may not live long or she may die during the childhood of the native.  If Chandra in the 8th house is aspected by 3 papas ( malefics] or is situated between malicious planets the child's mother and child itself may die at an early age. This is called Bala-ristba. ( See Bala-ristba ).
   Chandra may be the cause of lunacy if he is aspected by powerful Sani,  Mangal or Rahn, this configuration of planets. ( viz., Chandra', relation with Sani, Mangat and Rahu) may be the cause of epilepsy, piles and indigestion.
   If the 8th house is a watery sign and Chandra is posited there with Vrhaspathi being unfavourable due to ownenhip of a. malefic house the native ruay suffer from asthma, phthisis, consumption etc. He may be suscep:ible to cough and cold only in case lagna and its lord are well-disposed in a favourable sign.

Mangal in tl!e 8th house
   3. Mangal among other things denotes physical strength and energy, activity, effort, brothers and sisters, sinews, museular­ tissues:, weapons, strife, war, litigation, accidents, etc
   If Mangat is situated in 8th house it indicates sudden death owing to surgical operation, piles, fissure, plague, cholera. dysentery, small pox, meningitis etc. He may be involved in a, litigation or debt.
   Manga! in the 8th house may cause wife's death in case of a male and if he is associated with 8th house in a woman'so horoscope the husband may die,
 If Mangat in the 8th house is conjoined with a malefic the tive may be fond of womeu of br.d repute, in case of a woman,

INDICATION OF' BHAVA8	199

the lady may be illegally attached to a paramour by discarding her husband. This is also term,,d as Koja dosb.

Bodha in !he 8th house
   4. Budha represents le:1rning, education7 wisdom, i,ttellig;:nce, art, ti1ngue, power ofspee·ch. nerves, humour etc
   Wilen the planet is situated in the 8th house the native may be rtu:I, iw education:.:\ career will n·ot bo smooti1 running {them may b m:rny obstructions }, his manner of talk or .;onversativu m'.ly not b::: convincing, he may be attacked with such disca s tbat c.m not be diagonis d easily.
   Whea Budha in the 3th house is strong and is not associated w,th or aspected by any malefic the native m'IY be wise, prudent, well-mannered, but afflicted 13udha ir the 8th house may be the cau-; of many evils and worries.
   In t.he horoscope of a woman afflicted Budha in the 8th h Juse causes unhappy incideats in the family and her husband may have to b ar t•.1e brunt of those evil events.

Vrhaspathi in the 8th house
  5, Vrhaspathi in the 8th house is not a benefactor for the native, He may not have any child at all or his children may die premature death, In a wom:rn's horoscope Vrbas:,atbi in the 3th hoa<e may cause abortions, or !!.er children may die early. The native may be mean-minded, he may earn his livelihood as a menial, he will bo untruthful and a religious hypocrite, he may be dependant on others and lead a miserable life, But Vrhaspathi in the 8th house gives Ieng life to the native.

Sakra io the 8th house
   6, Sukra is a significator of marriage, wife or husband, attactment, material pleasure, sexual act, passion, love, beauty, elegant eyes, fir1arts, scandals, venereal diseases etc,
Pbala dipika writes that Sukra in the 8tn house makes the
native a longlived and rich, anJ a ruler of earth. Astrological 1avants are of opinion that only powerful Sukra in the 8th house can give the aforesaid good results. If he is weak the native may have to face scandals, he may be adulterous, may

200	HINDU BCIBNCB 011' THB ll'UTIJllB
visit public women, may be addicted to wine and women, may suffer from venereal disease etc.
   When the ,planet is in conjunction with Mangal or they arc related to each other in any other way there may be loss of life partner at his or her premature age and the native may be a man of loose morals.
 Sukra with Sani in the 8th house may make the native impotent.
   In the horoscope of a woman when Sukra is posited in the 8th 'house and the 7th house and its lord arc not favourable the native's conjugal life is totally marred. This is also a aign of premature death of the husband ( or wife ).
Presence of Sukra and Sani in the 8th house may cauae
diabetes, kidney trouble or inflammation of prostate gland.
   In the horoscope of a woman the native may suffer from di,eases of ovary or uterus or both if Sukra is situated in the 8th house.
   If Mangal is conjoined with Sukra, she may have to undergo surgical operation due to those ailments.

Sani in the 8th house
7. Primarily Sani is the indicator of death.  He signifies
·sorrows, afflictions, disappointment, miseries, meannesa, demnralization. ( To get elaborate idea of Sani'a significance please read 'Karakata' chapter).
Eighth house is astrologically termed as 'Randhra'. The term
.means a hole or a bore of a tube through which all poisonous oubstance may get in or get out. Sani controls that hole or bore. If he is in joyful mood he allows the vicious instincts in a man to get into that bore and sends back the same after proper sterilization, thereby the planet takes the responsibility of moulding a si_nful person into a 'sadhaka' i.e. a true devotee. So, a beneficial Sani is a blessing in disguise. He withholds at first, later to deal in double measure.  When Sani is the ruler in the horoscope he makes slow plodding ascent and the promise
•of success early in life is scant, But as the years roll by the are begins to curve upward the  native rises to  prominence in life.
Initially Sani stands for  worries and anxieties, impurity,

INDIOA!l'ION OF BBAVAB	201
•imincerity and sinful acts. So, when he is in the 8th house the native ·may have to suffer from serious type of miseries and worries, be is to struggle bard to ward off obstacles that beset on his way to prosperity, he faces monetary stringency, develops nasty habits, every effort in his life may be thwarted by enemies or by some sort of impediments about which he never thought of before their exact appearance in the field of action.  Sani in the
.8th place makes a man cruel, peevish, dishonest. Afflicted Sani in the 8th house may be the cause of suffering from colic pain, gout or rheumatism, idiosyncracies, windy ailments, defective eyesight ( visioo ) and tooth trouble.
   When Sani is afflicted by Ravi the man becomes depraved and dishonest and struggle in his life knows no bound.
   Sani in the 8th house gives long life to the native but if the planet is conjoined  with  Mangal  d ath  may  occur  due  to
,urgical operation, if he is in conjunction with Sukra the native may be impotent. Of course if Sani and Sukra are aspected by a benefic the native may be sexually normal.
   In the horoscope of a woman Sani in the 8th house deprives the native of mental pea e in conjugal or family life. Moreover she may be a widow. This unfavourable result more often is experienced when that Sani and Sukra are in conjunction with Mangal.
Rahu in the 8th house
8. Rahu represents litigation11 corruption. thievest serpents:,
duplicity, quarrelsome habit etc.
   When Rahu is posited. iu the 8th house the native becomes dishonest, mean, degraded and quarrelsome. Rabu in the 8th house gives the native ample opportunities to earn money through dishonest method, he is unscrupulous and does not hesitate to cheat his friends and near and dear ones.
   Rahu along with weak Chandra when seated in the 8th house brings about premature death of the life partner.  In the
,birtbcbart of a woman this yoga is very unfavourable and the lady may lose her husband at her-early age.
   Death is possible due to snakebite if Rahu in conjunction with Mang ! occupies the 8th house. Combination of these two planets may also cause death by poison.

202	Hl!IDU somNCE 011' THE  ll'UTUBB
   The native himself may be responsible for loss of domestic· peace in whose horoscope Rahu is sit11ated in the 8th house but if Rahu is favoured by a benofic the unfavourable result may to­ some extent be mitigated.

Keto in the 8th house
   9. Ketu signifies quarrels, selfishness, secret intrigues and company, backbiting, vicious tendencies, mendicancy, resignation and surrender to God and salvation.
   Ketu in the 8th house does not give domestic peoce, he is the· cause of unfriendly relation or quarrel with relatives. If the planet is situated in the 8th house and Mangal also is there the· native may suffer from piles, hernia, or any other secret disease, In the horoscope of a female the native may be a widow early in life if Ketu is in the 8th place from lagoa. In case the planet is conjoined with or aspected by a powerful beoefic the evil result as said above may seldom be expected.
   Ketu in the 8th place indicates disappointment, shift from one place to another, struggle in life.

Cancellation of Rlstha yoga
   Ristha yogas-baliiristha, Pitriristha or Matriristhas are considered to be cancelled under the following configuration of planets:
   1. A powerful Vrhaspathi rising in Lagoa cancels all kinds of risthas.
   2. If the lagna-lord is powerful; posited in any kendra and is aspected by a benefic without being aspected by any malefic the child inspitc of biiliiristha is blessed with long life and he is lucky.
   3. When any one of Chandra, Budha, Vrhaspathi and Sukra ia strong and· occupies a Kendra or Kona position ristha yogu are taken to be nullified.
   4. When malefic planets that bring forth ristha yogas are posited in a favourable house in navamsa chart, or favourably situated in majority of Sada or Dasa-Vargas and also at tho samo time are aspected by favourable planet or planets in tho birth chart the rillha yogas are deemed to be cancelled.

INDICATION ("'F DHAVAS	203
   5. When any one among Chandra, Budha, Vrhaspatbi and Sukra occupies a favourable house, favourable navamsa and Drekkan-all kinds of ristha yogas lose their baneful stings and the child lives long.
6. When all the planets  are situated in Shirsodaya rasis
ristha yogas can not do any harm to the baby. [ Mesa, Vrsa, Karkata, Dhanu and Makara rasis are called Pristhodaya rasis, all other six rasis (Mitbuna, Simha, Kanya, Tula, Vriscika and Kumbha) are Shirsodaya rasis. Mina rasi is called Woovayodaya rasi meaning both Pristhodaya and Shirsodaya rasi].
7. When  at  birth Chandra is posited in Budha, Vrhaspathi
or Sukra'. drekkan ristha yoga is cancelled. Even if Chandra under the aforesaid· circumstance is situated in the 8th house ristha yoga is to be taken as cancelled.
8. Ristha yogas will be of no importance if the full Moon
( Purna Chandra ) is posited in a favourable house, Navamsa or is situated between favourable planets or she is conjoined with any benefic.
   9. Ristha yogas are nullified when Rahu occupies Mesa, Vrsa or Karkata identical with 3rd, 6th or 11th house from lagna.
   10. When lagna rises in Tula, Dbanu, or Mina rasi and Sani is there in lagna all the bala-ristbas are considered to be cancelled.
   II. If Rahu is posited in Simha lagna all kinds of ristha aro to be taken as cancelled. A child born with Rahu in Simha lagna will be lucky and prosperous.
   12. All the risthas are nullified if Sukra occupies 3rd. 5th, 9th or 11th house and Vrhaspathi is posited in even rasi identical with the 7th house from lagna ( Vrsa, Karkata, Kanya, Vrscika, Makara and Mina rasis are even rasis.  Even rasi is a synonym of Sama rasi, other six rasis are odd or Visama rasis ).
   13. Parents of the baby will be happy to see the prosperity of their child when in bis or her birthchart the 4th house is occupied by a benefic and Vrhaspathi is posited in any kendra or kona house, ristha yogas in the chart of the baby will be of no avail.
   14. If Ravi in case of birth at day time or Chandra in case of birth at night is powerful and is seated in  the 11th place

204	HINDU SCIBNCB OP THB PUTURB

from lagna innumerable faults arising out of ristha yogas are
vanished.
   15. If the 3rd, 6th or 11th house is occupied by any one of Sani, Mangal and Ravi ristha yogas are considered to be dispelled.
   16. If Chandra is posited in a favourable house and is aspected by the lagnapathi ( lagna-lord ) all ristha yogas arc deemed to be cancelled,
   17. If the lord of the rasi where Chandra is situated is powerful and is aspected by or conjoined with a benefic all ristha yogas are deemed to be cancelled.
   18. The 8th lord positing in the 6th or 12th house may make the native sickly. In his early life there is danger from water or snake.

A few Instances of rlstha yoga1 that are nnllllled nnder special conditions
   1. Lagna in Dhanu rasi, Kumbba is occupied by Sani, Ravi, Budha and Ketu, Vrhaspatbi in Mesa, Rabu in Simba, and Tula ( the 11th house from lagna ) is occupied by Mangat.
   The native inspite of serious illness or accident on more than one occasion was saved. For Chandra is powerful due to aspect of lagna-lord Vrbaspatbi, be is in the 11th house from lagna and Vrbaspatbi is situated in Kona from lagna. Further, Sukra, the lord of Chandra rasi is powerful in his exalted house and posited in a Kendra position from lagna.
   2. Lagoa rises at Karkata rasi, Vrbaspatbi and Rahu are i11 lagna, Chandra in Simha, Ketu in Makara, Ravi and Sukra in Mina, Budha in Mesa, Sani in Vrsa and Mangal in Mithuna.
   This lady was seriously ill at the age of 10 and 22 years. On both occasions, her relatives lost all hope of life and doctors also were at their wit's end and seemed to be puzzled. Dr. B. C. Roy was consulted and the lady came round after a few days.
   In this case also lagna falls in Vrhaspathi's Navamsa, Chandra in his own Navamsa and Sani is situated in the 11th house from lagna.

INDICATION Oll' BHAVAS	20S

Longhity or Ayu
   It is one of the most difficult thing to predict the exact span· of life. One can master over mathematical process of calculation·
or longivity hut that is not all to determine one's longivity.  Of"
all methods enumerated by learned Rishis, such as, Jaimini, Parasara, Barahamihira, majority of modern astrological Pandits of fndia generally prefer Parasara•s method of calcuhtion oflongivity, which is almost the same as Jaimini.
  Let us now discuss Maharshi Parasara's Method of calculation, of longivity. This Rishi has in his Parasari Hora explained more than one method of calculation and we shall try to explain aome of them one after another.
There are three kinds of longivity, viz., long life, medium
life and short life.  Span of long life extends from 80 years to-
120 years.	Medium from after 40 yean to 80 years and upto 40
years of age short life is indicated.
Longivity is to be determined from three pairs separately i.e•.
(i) Lords of lagna and the Eighth house, (Ii) Sani and Chandra, (lli) Lagoa and Hora lagna. If two pairs agree to each other longivity will be determined from those pairs. If three pairs indicate different span of life the longivity indicated by Hora­ lagna will tell us which kind of longivity the native shall enjoy.
   There is a special rule in case of the pair consisting of Sani and Chandra. If Chandra is situated in lagna or the 7th place from lagna longivity is to be calculated from Jagna and Chandra, otherwise calculation of longivity is to be relied upon Sani and Chandra.
   Rasis are divided into Chara ( moveable ). Sthira [ fixed ) and Dwatyaka ( dual ). Mesa, Karkata, Tula and Makara are Chara rasis; Vraa, Simha, Vrscika and Kumbha are Sthira rasia and Mithuna, Kanya, Dhanu and Mina are Dwatyaka raais.
These  terms  Chara,  Sthira  and  Dwatyaka  rasis  are
.aymbolically noted as I, 2, 3 respectively. Now mode of calculation is as follows, of the first pair Lagna an!l 8th Lord :
   (i) Jf,Lagna is posited in Sthira rasi ( which means 2) and Eighth lord in Dwatyaka rasi ( which means 3 ) total number is 5, there is only 3 in all ( i.e. Chara, Sthira and Dwatyaka or we

206	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE l'UTURB

may term it as I, 2 and 3 ).  Therefore 5 - 3=2  which  means
lon_g life.
   (ii) If of the next pair-Sani and Chandra or Lagoa and Chau.Jr& one is in :a1umbe-r I and another is in number 2, the to'.al is 3. This means medium life.
   iii) If of rhe last pair one is in No. 1 and another is in No. 3 tho total is 4 wnich is equivalent to I. This means short life.
We may show this remit ia the following table:



L&ngnapa.thi-Ch rc1, 1	I Lagna.r athi Chara I
Eighth lorc1-	"	1	i Eighth lord Sthira 2
l ··-------	·-
Lu•'.tJ.: p1tl.hi-Sthria -2	Li gna.pa.thi Sthira 2
"	'
l•Jighth lord-Dwntyaka 3 I ighth lorJ. Chara. 1

Lagna.pa.tbi Ohara. 1 Eighth lord Dwa.tya.ka. 3
Lagnapathi Sthira. 2
Eighth lord	"	2


   The table shows that nun1ber 1 means short life, number 2 long life and number 3 medium life.
   By this process other two pairs may be examined. Of these three pairs if two pairs agree the span of life such as long, medium or snore is to be determined according to the result hown by Lagna and Hora Lagna.
Span of short	life -32, 36,  40 years of age
,,	,, medium Iife-64, 72,  80	,,	,,  ,,
,,	,,	long life  -96, 108. 120	,,	,,	.,
   Minute calculation of longivity is to be done in the following manner:
There are 3 significators of ayurman viz., 40, 36, and 32.
   When ayurdaya ( span of life) is indicated by lagnapathi and Eighth lord 40 is the significator's years.
   When it is indicated by Sani and Chandra or lagna & Chandra 36 is the significating years ( in such a case lagnapathi & 8th lc,rd should not be an indicator of longivity ).
   In the pair of Lagoa and Hora lagna which is the indicator of span of life, 32 is the_significating years. Now, by rule of three, the total span of life is to be calculated. For instance-a native's longivity is determined  by the pair J{ Lagnapathi and Eighth
.lord and also Sani and Chandra.

INDJOATION OF BRAVAS	W7
In this case, as the pair of lagnapathi and Eighth lord is the
<Clctermining factor of longivity significating year is 40.
  Say, Lagnapathi denotes No. 1, Eighth lord also No. 1, it indicates long life. So significating year will be 40.
Sani is in Kumbha ,." 23', Chandra in Tula 22• 35' Kumbha
{ Sthira ) means 2, Tllla ( Chara ) denotes t, the total is 3, hence medium life. Two groups show different results, the 1st one indicates long life, the 2nd group indicates medium life. Therefore the pair of lagna and hora \agna will decide the spaa of life.
   Say, Lagna in Dhanu ,• 16', Hora Iagna in Tula 4• 38', Now, mathematical process to determine longivity is to be worked out by rule of three. We are now certain that by !agna and hora lagna ( 3 + 1 means short life ) native has short life and because as group of lagna and hora lagna indicates span of life the significating year is 32. This is also to be noted that 30 degree makes a rasi. Now in Dhanu lagna 3° 16' has already been used up at the time of birth and remaining degrees out of 30 are yet to be consumed. The process of rule of three is as follows : Lagna sphuta is 3• 16'. Therefore 30'-3' 16'=26' 44' is to be used up. Similarly horalagnasphuta is 4• 38' in Tula. The remaining degrees to be used up out of 30 degree are 25• 22'
The significating year is 32
Lagna to be consumed is 2•o 44'
Horalagna to be onsumcd is 25' 22' 26' 44'=1604 Kala or min.
..2s· 22'==1522	,,	,,	,,
The significating year is 32

By rule of three 30 degree :
   1800 Kala x=l604X32
1800

1604 : 32 year : x
1544 : 32  ,.  : X
=28 years 6 m I day.

-Similarly	30 degrees : 2s· 22' : 32 : x
1800 kalii : 1522	: 32 : x
x=l522X32=27 years Om 21 days
1800
By addition 28 yrs 6 m I day+ 27 yrs Om 21 days
=55 yrs 6 m 22 days

208	HINDU SCIENCB OF TUB FUTURE

   This is to be divided by 2 which is equal to 27 yrs 9 m, 11 days.
   This is the span of life of the native. If the span of life thus found happens to be medium, significating year is to be added with this figure. If it is long life significating year i• to be added twice with this figure.
Let us summarize the rules in the following manner :
   I. The significating year will be 40 if Lagnapathi and 8th lord decide the span of life.
   2. The significating year will be 36 if Sani and Chandra or Lagna and Chandra decide the span of life ( if the pair of Lagna- pathi and 8th lord is not the deciding factor ).   ·
   3. If lagna and Hora lagna decide the span of life the signi­ ficating year is 32. In case the three groups do not agree with one another 32 year is the significating year.
   There is one anomaly in these rules. For, there will be no chance of using 36 as significating year. Because of the three groups one will be either Lagnapathi and Eighth lord or lagna and Horalagna. For no single group excepting Lagna and Hora­ lagna can decide the issue.
   Some of the commentators arc of opinion that when Lagna­ pathi and Eighth lord and Sani and Chandra or Chandra and Lagna decide the span of life, significating year will be 40 and 36 respectively at the time of calculation.
   However there are a few more points in respect of calculating the span of life.
   We have seen earlier the process of calculating longivity by rule of three. Now, if the span of life is long and the year of Iongivity found after dividing the figure obtained by addition of two result• and division of the same by two, the signlficating year is to be added twice and the result will be the span of long life. If it is medium life significating year will be added once only.
Rednction or increase of zone of longivity
   Zone of longivity is reduced or increased according to the position and strength of Sani.
Condition of reduction of longivity is as follows:
   1. If Sani is weak and associated with or aspected by the 8th lord span of life is to be reduced in the following manner:

INDI0.! 1011 OP BHAVAS	2Qll

   (a) If Sani is co11joined with or aspected by the 8th lord­ in case the span of life is long, longivity is to be redvced to medium.
   (b) In case of medium life longivity will be short and if it is short life span of life will be very short. If short life is found the native may die at a very early age.
   2. If Sani is strong occupying his exalted or own house the span of life is increased.  It means that if the native has short life it will be medium, if it is medium longivity will be Jong and if long life is indicated longivity will be very long.
   This is also to be noted that reduction of longivity is to be thought of in case Smi is debilitated, positioned in the inimical house an:\ at the same time aspected by or conjoined with a malefic planet,
   Only aspected by or conjoined with a malefic Sani will not be responsible for reduction of the span of life unless and until he is situated in his enemy-house or :positioned at the house of dibilitation.
   3. Similarly when Sani occupies a favourable house and is aspected by or associated with a benefic or he is posited in his own house or house of exaltation identical with a favourable bhava, increase of zone of longivity is tc, be thought of.
Role of Vrhaspathi with regard to increase of the Zone of Jongivity:
   After considering the position, strength etc. of Sani Vrhaspathi's position is to be examined.
   Vrhaspathi does not reduce the Zone oflongivity. He can rather increase the span of life when he is positioned in lagna or 7th place from lagna. If he bis situated in a favourable house aspectcd by a benefic or be occupies his own, mooltrikona or exalted house without being aspected by or conjoined with a malefic, span of life will be enhanced. In that case the nativ with the yoga of short life will be endowed with medium life and he having been born with medium life will have long life.
Another method of determining span of life : .
   In Atmakaraka Navamsa chart the lord of the 8th house from lagna and the lord of the 8th house from the 7th place (from lagna) may be indicators of span of life.
14

HIN!JU SOXBNIJE 01' !BB PU!U&E

  (/1 If the stronger of these two planets is situated in any Kendra tt h indication oflor.g life.
   (iil If the •tronger planet i, posited in 'Upakendra' (i. . 2nd, 5th, 8th and I Ith houses) it is the indic"tion of medium life.
  (iii) If he is in 'Anukendra' (i.e. 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th hou,e•J it is short life,
(iv) Further if these two planets are equally strong and are
placed in a Kendra it is short life, if the,y are in 'Upakendra' medium life and if they are situated in 'Anukendr2.' it is an indication of long life.

Death inflicting dasa and antardasa :
   1. According to Maharshi Parasara b,,th the lords of the 2nd and the 7th houses are marakas (death inflicting planets) of which the lord of the 7th house is the most powerful maraka.
   Laghu Parasara holds a different view. According to this treatise the 2nd lord as a maraka is stronger than the 7th lord.
2. Whatever may be the opinion of dillerent authors it is an
admitted fact that determination of death inflicting capacity of these two planets-2nd and 7th lords depe!!d on their position, strength or weakness and malefic or beneficial aspects on theru by favourable or unfavourable planets.
   3. The lord of the 8th house also under certain conditions is considered as a principal miiraka.
   4. When the native is born with the yoga of medium life dasa of the planet owning 6th or 8th house inflicts death but if the 6th house is occupied by many malefics-at least more than two planets, 6th lord is considered as the most powerful maraka.
(5). (i)  Lords of the death inflicting houses (viz., the 2nd ar.J
t'he 7th houses).
   (ii) Natural papas (unfavourable planets) occupying miirakasthanas i.e. 2nd and 7th places,
   (iii) Piipa planets associated with those unfavourable planets situated in the marakastbanas.
   These planets may be inflicting death to the native. If the native does not enjoy the dasa of the No. 1 planets, No. 2 planets may cause death and if the native bas least chance of enjoying the dasa of planets mentioned in No. 2, the native shall die in the dasa  period of No. 3 planets.  If per chance the native may

INDIOATION OP BIU.VAS	211
<not enjoy tho dasa of any one of those planets,- the planet related to the 12th lord may bring about death of the native.
Saal u a Maraka ( death Inflicting planet ) :
In  this respect Sani has a different role.  He is a natural
,malefic. Though he is a signifi.cator of longivity he acts as a principal maraka if he is in any way related to any other miiraka planet. In that case he surpasses all other maraka planets and will kill the native in his dasa or antardasa.
   Of course if a native is born with the yoga of long or medium life he can  not die before he reaches the respective zone and
,maraka Sani may give serious illness and not death in his dasa and antardasa.
   Maharshi Parasara enumerated	a few	more	methods of determining zone oflongivity. Somo of them are as follows:
   (i) In the birth chart the lord of the 8th hou e from lagn:, and th, lord of the 8th house from the 7th place from lagna r ay be indicators of span of lifP.. The stronger of these two lords wil,
actua!ly determine the zone of longivity by its position in the chart. Such as, if tbe stronger planet is situated in a kendra it i, th indication of long life.
   If he is situated in any Upa-kendr,: (i.e. next to kendra- 2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th) it is medium life.
If he is in an Anu-kendra (i.e. 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th) it is
an indication of short life.
   If these two lords are equally strong, zone of longivity will have to be ascertained in reverse or,for which means if they arc in kendra it indicates short life, if they are in Upakendra it i, medium life and in case of their position in Anukendra it is an indication of long life.
6. Maharshi Parasara's other methods are stated herebelow :
   (i) If the lords of the 8th house and lagna together are 1ituated in the 8th place from lagna with any  other  pap,
-.(naturally unfavourable planet) it is an indication of short life.
   (ii) If the 8th places from the positions of Sani an<l the 10th lord are occupied by any papa short life is indicated.
   N. B. Readers must be cautious in ascertaining span of lifr because if the lagnapathi (lord of lagna), lord of the 8th hou,,,
.and Sani are strong and lagna is aspccted by or conjoined with

lllNDU SOIBN:lB OP !JIB PU URB

strong lagna-lord the native iospite of shvrt life-yoga will not d;e­ at an early age.
   The case of the auth"r (of this book} himself is If specific­ instance. Jnspite of Alpayu yoga he did not die at a very early age and is still :llive at 74/75 years of age, because his lagna and Chandra are aspected by Vrhaspathi who is lagnapathi and Sani both in natal and navamsa:chart is strong.
7. A few important hints given by Maharshi Para ara :
   These hints or yogas as we may call them, are said to be easier in determining span of life.
   (i) If retrograde Sani and retrograde Mangal exchange each other's houses it is an iad1cation of short life.
   (ii) If waning moon, lag,iapathi and the lord of the 8th house occupy 4th, 6th, 8th and/or 12th places, or when the waning moon and lagnapathi in combination with the lord of the 8th house are posited in the 8th place from lagna the yoga thus found is Alpayu (short life).
   (iii) Again if the aforesaid three planets unaspected by any beneficial planet are aspected by or conjoined with any papa (malefic) and are situated in either Sani or Mangal's sign (house) short life is indicated.
8. Long life :
   (i) When all the benefics are placed in kendra or kona i.e. some of them in kendra and ot'1ers in kona, papas are placed in the 3rd or 6th house and 8th house remains unoccupied by any planet the native shall Jive, 90 years of age.
(ii) If Vrhaspathi, Sukra, Budha and Ravi occupy respec­
tively lal,lna, 4th, 5th and 6th houses and the remaining planets are not placed in the 8th or their enemy houses longivity of the native will be 96 years of age.
(iii) A native's longivity will be 76 years of age when the 4th
hou•e from lagna is occupied by Vrhaspathi, 5th house from Vrhaspathi is posited by Budha, and Sukra is placed in the 6th house from Vrhaspathi.
(iv) If Vrhaspathi is situated in the 7th house from lagna,
Budha and Sukra occupy 5th and 6th places respectively from Vrhaspathi the native's longivity will be 88 years of age.
(v) Similarly if 10th house is occupied by Vrhaspathi, and

INDICATION 01" BHA.V AS	S13

Budha, and Sukra occupy 5th and 6th places respectively from Vrhaspathi the long1vity will be 81 years of age.
(i,) Longivity will (be 100 years of age if all the planets arc
in kendra, it will be 90 years if all of them are situated in - pa­ ker.dra (2nd, 5th, 8th and I Ith houses) and when apoklima hou,es (3rd, 6th, 6th and 12th houses) arc occupied by all the planets, longivity will be 80 ye,ars of age.

There are few more yogas, stated by Maharshi Pan,sara to
-:ascertaia longiv_ity of a native. They are as follows :
9. Alpayu (short life) :
   (a) When the lord of the 8th house is situated in any kendra and lagnapathi is weak the native's longivity will be 23 or 32 years of age.
(b) If the 8th place and its lord are associated with any papa
.and lagnapathi is weak it is an Alpayu-yoga.
   (c) If the 8th place and its lord are associated with any piipa and the 12th place is occupied by 'Krura' (cruel or very malefic) 'Planets the native dies just after his birth,
Ravi, Mangal, Sani and Rahu are generally termed as Krura
-planets.
(d) The lord of the 8th house is debilitated, th 8th house is
,occupied by malefics and  lord of lagna is weak.  The native
,.,.ho owns such a birthchart •hall die at an early age.
  (e) It is an indication of Alp¦ya when the 5th and 8th places and the lord of the 8th house arc conjoined with malefic planets.
   (J)	If the lord of the 8th house is in the 8th place from lagna and Chandra is a1sociated  with any malefic and  is not
,aapectcd by any beneficial planet it is the sign of Alpayu.

A few formula 1tatecl by Maharshl Par¦a¦ra by which Zo'ne of
1ong life maJ be lleert¦lned:
   (g) When lagnapathi is posited in his exalted house, Chandra in the llth place and Vrhaspathi occupies the 8th house the native shall have long life,
   Exactly such configuration of planets is seldom found in a 'birthchart, so the following points are to be noted carefully before a 'Verdict ot long life is pronounced :

214	HINDU S0111:NOE OP TUE PUTURE
  (!) If lagnapathi, l"rda of the 8th and 10th houses and Sani, are strong.
   (ii) If the 8th house is aspected by a benefic and is not associated with any papa.
  (iii) If the lords of lagna and the 8th house are strong and they are posited in a Kendra or Kona.
   It is needless to repeat that the aforesaid yogas will enhance­ span oflife.
   10. A few formula, of Uttara Kalamrita, a famous treatise on astrology written by Mahakavi (the greatest Indian poet} Kalidasa, are stated herebelow :
   (i) If any favourable planet occupying any kendra or kona house does not cast aspect on lagnapathi, or the lord of the rasi: where lagnapathi is situated and lagna itself are not aspected by a favourable planet Alpayu is indicated. (aspect here meana­ probably full aspect}.
   (ii) If lagna or janmarasi {where Chandra is situated in the­ birthchart) is aspected by the 8th lord, or the 8th lord OI" Chandra is aspected by either Sani or Mangat, and in both the­ cases lagna and the lord of rasi where lagnapathi is posited are· not aspectcd by any benefic the native is short-lived.
   (iii) If lagna-sphuta (i.e. degree and minute of lagna) or the­ janmarasi is aspected by the 8th lord, or the 8th place from lagna· or Chandra is aspected by Sani and Mangal and in both the· cases lagna-sphuta and Chandra arc not aspected by any bene­ ficial planet the native shall die at a very early age.
   11. Some of the experienced astrologers have found the­ following configuration of planets as very effective in ascertaining the zone of longivity.
   (I) Divide the 12 houses by 3 (count either from lagna OI" Chandra} 1st to 4th houses belong to. first group, tifth·to eighth houses belong to second group and ninth to twelfth houses belon tothird group.
If majority of planets out of 9 are posited in the 1st group
indication is long life.
If majority of planets are placed in the 2nd group it is medium,
life and if they are in the 3rd group it indicates •4ort life.

ll'IDIOATIOII OP BHAVAB	215
12. A very lmport9nl cine to find out zone of longivity :
  (i) If Navamsa lords of lagna, lagnapathi and Chandra are friendly to lagna-lord it indicates long life.
   (ii) If they are neutral to the lord of lagna it is mediun,, life.
  (iii) If they are inimical to the lagnapathi short life is. indicated,
   It is not possible to state all yogas regarding determination· oflongivity in a small book like this. Inquisitive readers may consult Brihat-jataka, Phaladipika, Jataka Pari_iat, Sarvartha Chintamani, Sarabally and many other important authoritative books on astrology where further detailed yogas of longivity have been discussed by eminent authors.

CHAPTER--IX

BHAGYA BHAVA
The Ninth house
  The b!J.avas that are most essential to the determination of the  quality and character of tho horoscope are  (1)  Lagoa,
(2)  Bhagya and  (3) Karma bhavas.
   The three go tojether, they are _integrated. For, it is easy enough to perceive that as there has to be a wall before there is a good paintilig on it, so, there has to be a strong lagna to have a good Bhagya and good Karma. And since Bhagya and Karma are really the same thing in the circular order karma determining the bhagya {destiny) and bha ;ya determining the karma-they would always go togeth•.r with the lagna. In fact the trio arc inseparable. Every lagna baa its bhagya and every bhagya has its karma. The karma determines the bhagya and both effect the individual that is lagna.
  Gralia Yamat an authoritative ancient text sets forth the sovereign importance of karma bhava and bhagya bhava in these words "The Karmasthana is very important and has to be studied very carefolly. If there is no graha (planet) here or this house is not aspected by any graha the native roams about in abject proverty. Also when the bhagyasthana and the karmasthana are without any planet or unaapected, the result is deplorable". So, the dharma bhava (bhagya, dharma and !Ith house are syno­ nymoua) and the karma b'.lava have to be rightly evaluated in a ltoroscope. The sage Parasara aho haa emphasized the impor: nce of bhagya and karma.
   Another name for bhagya bhava is Purba Janma (previous birth). 'Daiva', 'Punya', 'Dharma' and 'Swavaba' are aatro­ logical ,ynonyms. A favourable 'daiva' helps the individual to take atl hurdles without much difficulty, An unfavourable 'daiva' raises obstacles at every step. It is only when tho individual is exceptionally favoured with a strong karmaathana. that he can take all the obstacles in hia stride  and  make

INDIOATION OF llHAVAS	21'7

..satisfactory progress in life. We are all very finite beings, bounded by mortality on one side and birtli on the other.
   Not all of us can dupiicate the eminence of Shri Rama Chandra or the knowledge, competence and devotion of Arjuna. Nor are w blessed with advice such as Srikrishna's at Kurukshetra and that is why we are supplicants to 'daiva' for favours.
"0 life as futile then as fail
0 for thy voice to soothe and bless What hope of answer and redress Behind the veil, behind the veil."
   Our fate in this life at least as far as we can determine, is determined by the law of Karma. Our destiny is our Will and Effort in previous birth. The great sage Vasistha tells Sri Rama Chandra that even the mightiest mountain like Sumeru can be conquered by determined effort, human will, and wisdom born of experience. So, it is nothing strange that Will Power can neutralise the result of evil deeds in the previous existence.
   Strong Will conquers destiny as easily as the strong person defeats the weaker one. In other words if 'bhagya' and 'karma• bhavas together with their lords are favourable, luck favours the native, otherwise the native has to go through against heavy
-Odds. To overcome unfavourable destiny. continued and persevering effort ii necessary.
The 'Strong Will' itself is also the result of 'Karma', whether
-in this or in  previous birth.  A native would not have the
,strength to develop his Will or opportunities of doing it if previous births or th.is birth tilt the balance against him.  But.
•ince the greater part of the determinant is and  will alway&
·remain unknown, like the submarine part of an iceberg, we
are concentrating only on the visible part.
   The dhana bhava and karma bhava both are also included in t.hagya bhava. The	native's wealth, name and fame and distinction may be at their best if there is favourable bhagya yoga in the horoscope. As told before there is a link	between previous birth and the worldly happiness and exuberant career of the present birth. In judging the beneficial condition of the · bhagya-lord we must note the condition of bhagya-karta, which

218	HINDU SOIEHCB OP BE PUWBI!
is the secondary ruler of destiny. The lord of the rasi where bhagyapathi is situated is the ruler or controller of the native• destiny, If the bhagya-karta planet is happily disposed, aspected by or conjoined with benefic planet or planets the native shall also be lucky. Of course, we must not overlook the quality of the 9th lord ; both bhagyapathi and bhagya-karta being favourable will do immense good to the native.
   The following configuration of planets may constitute good bhagya yogas:
   I. If lagna or Chandra is in Vargottam Navamsa and the second house from Ravi is occupied by a benefic planet, or if the atma-karaka planet is placed in any kendra from lagna and kendra position is not vacant.
   • If kendra position or positions are occupied by benefic planets, bhagyapathi is aspected by or is in conjunction with
bencfics, and  again bhagyapathi is in benefic Navamsa and
has attained favourable Vargas the native will be blessed with good luck.
   3. According to rules stated earlier if the lord of the 9th house is strong and favourable, Vrhaspathi the natural indicator of fortune is placed favourably in Sada-Varga, the bhagyakarta JS not placed in any malefic house, not aspected by or conjoined with malefic planets, or bhagyapathi is not combust o, debilitated the native will be very fortunate.
   4. On the whole a favourable bhagyapathi occupying kendra or kona houses from lagna will raise the native from ordinary position to a higher status in life.
   S. It is better for lagnapathi to be posited in lagna or in any place from within lagna and the 7th house ; under that circums­ tance (a) the best yoga will be if Vrhaspathi and both 9th and 10111 lords arc favourably related to each other. (b) Again bhagya­ pathi, bhagya-karta and Sukra occupyinl,! kendra or kona position will impart very favourable result in improving the nativc's fortune. (c) When the strong lord of luck is posited in lagna and receives the full aspect of Vrhaspathi the native will be held in high esteem by the king of the land and he will be very fortunate.
6. Excepting the 7th lord if other lord or lords of kendra•
athanas, the lord of the 5th house and lagna-lord are related to

INDIOATION OP BHAVAS

the lord of luck the native shall be lucky and shall prosper in life, This is also a bhagya yoga (wealth giving yoga) which was narrated while dealing with dhana bhava,
   7. When all the planets occupy six places serially or in any other manner in houses in-between lagna and the 7th house it i called "Ekabali" yoga.  This yoga is highly auspicious and, brilliant,	Rahu and Ketu have no place in forming this yoga. Pandit Jahawarlal	Nehru's	chart shows	this yoga	(some astrologers call it 'Samra! yoga'),
   8; When the full moon conjoins with Mangal or Sani and occupy the 9th house from lagna the native flourishes in many, ways, The age of the'beginning of prosperity may be reckoned from the period of dasa-antardasa of that planet who is strong and favourable and denotes luck. The age indicated by that planet may also be the age at which the native will be blessed: with good fortune,
   9. (a) When Vrhaspathi being in the house of luck is aspected by all other planets (Rahn and Ketu are not considered •s. planets) ; or
   (b) When all the planets aspect lagna or Chandra the exaltation of bhagya bhava is indicated, When lagna or Chandrn receives the aspect of all the planets it is 'Maha bhagya yoga'. This yoga is found in the birth-chart of Mahapra vu Sh ri Chaitanya. He is called God-in-Carnate.
   10, Lord of the rasi occupied by Chandra when placed in, an auspicious hhava, in his exalted or own house or otherwise favourable the native will be fortunate.
   11. The following configuration of planets and bhava-lords,, indicate prosperous life in different ages of the native, viz.,
   (a) , When Vrhaapathi occupie1 the 9th house, and th.e 9th. lord is posited in a Kendra the native is favoured with good luck at the age of 20 years.
   (b) When the lord of luck is in the 2nd place and the 2nd' lord is in the 9th prosperity of the native is indicated after 32:­ years of age.
   (c) When the natural benefics are exalled and strong 9th lord is in the 9th the native is favoured with luck in many a ways after his 36 ycan of age,  The age of the  planet, that

220	mNDU liCIENOB OP Tl'IB PUTUBE

indicates the increase of prosperity vis-a-vis fortune is the actual period of the beginning of good time.
Religious inclination :
   When the full moon is posited in the house of religion (synonym of the house of luck or 9th house) the subject becomes highly religious minded, he enjoys in his young age the material happiness, wealth, name and fame and people call him a man of great fortune, If the waning moon be in the 9th house the result will be just the reverse,
   (Mangat in the 9th house has a destructive influence over luck).
Religious inclination (Punya or Virtue) and Emancipation (or
Salvation) :
   l. If the 10th lord occupies the 9th house and strong 9th lord is aspected by or in conjunction with Vrhaspathi and Sukra the subject is a great devotee of God ; by persevering effort to realise God Almighty he can attain a place of high order among great sages.
   2. If the lord of Karmasthana is conjoined with 4 planets the subject attains salvation.
   3. 4 or more planets in a rasi make a man a 'Sannyas•i {an ascetic).
   4. When lord of lagna unaspccted by any other planet aspects Sani or Sani unaspected by any oth r planet aspects lord of lagna the native becomes a mendicant.
   5. In spite of Sannyas Yoga (Yoga of asceticism) if the 10th lord is aspected by Rahu Sannyat yoga ii nullified.
Occupatioa of 9th lord in dilfereat bhaya l
   ID the 1st house : When the 9th lord occupies the lagna the aubject is pious, intelligent, always cheerful, and devoted to brahmins and gods.
In the 2nd house:  If the 9th lord is poaited in the 2nd  house
the native becomes rich, learned, famous and he is held in high esteem by many.
   Io the 3rd house : . The native has affinity for his friends and associates, has many good friends and be has happy conjugal Uife.
lo the 4th house:  Th.e native le very respectful to his father,

Hlll!DU SCIBIJ()B OP' B	=uBB	921
inherits good wealth from his father, possesses landed property. He is benevolent to his friends and earns name and fame.
Io the 5th b<,ase: The native is very beautiful to look at, lucky
and a son of an illustrious fathef.
In the 6th house:  The native ii. inclined to sinful acts, and
meets w'th great obstacles on his way to prosperity.
   In the 7th house: The native's wife is beautiful, pious, and lucky, and he prospers through business pursuits.
Io the 8th house :  The subject may be dishonest, unlucky and
may be a man of wicked character.
   In the 9th house : The subject is very lucky, may earn name and fame for his religious deeds; he is truthful, devoted to God and is respectfu, to brahmins and superiors.
   In the 10th house: This is a favourable yoga of a very high order.  Indian astrologers call it 'Ksh.etra simhasana yoga'.  Due to the presence cf this brilliant yoga the subject wilJ be prosperous, we lthy ar:I honest ; he is resoected by the king of the land. His mother is also fortunate.
   In the 11th house : The native will be wealthy, pious, favoured by king and is blessed with long life.
  In the 12th house : The native has good academic career, he will be learned. If the 9th lord is a natural benefic the native will he a noted personality in the society and pc-pular. If :he planet is a natural malefic the native is cunning, extravagant, aod)s a n:ao of bad conduct.

The Tenth or Karma bhava
   The tenth bhava signifies profession, vocation, supremacy, honour, environment, father (particularly father's prosperity and wealth). The career of the native is to be ju1ged from the 10th house and its l rd. The characteristic of that planet (10th lord) may give a clue for finding out the nature of profession or vocation, though there are other factors too which will be discussed in the following paragraphs.
   But nevertheless it must be admitted that it is very difficult to give a decisive verdict about the nature of a man's professional career. Easy approaches and easy answers are seldom correct.

HINDU SOIENOB OP HB PU UBB

We have described the speciality of tho 10th bhava at the time
.,f delineation of the 9th house.  We may elaborate those points
tere again.
   Karma starts as soon as one is born, breathing itself is one iorm of it and there are of course many others. It i1 "Karma" that co-exists with an individual, at every stage of this multi­ faceted life. The nature of it may be good, bad or indifferent, 1:Jut karma and the individual are almost synonymou,. One doe, not exist without the other. A man rises and falls, enjoys or suffers according to the kind of 'Karma' he does. The nature of 'Karma' again is determined by the nature of his personality
:tsclf which again is another name 'Bhagya'. In this sense destiny is character and character is destiny, To understand it better, it is only necessary to explain it this way. Given any particular conjunction of circumstances in life it should be evident that one person would not react to it exactly the same way as another. Various people would react variously. What makes this difference? Obviously the varying characters or make-ups of different people. The situation that confronts them is substantially the same, it is only the different character of the different people that brings about that different reaction.
   The Tenth house in a horoscope has been affirmed as a symbol of Karma and naturally it is a most important house. Of course all the twelve houses are inter-related, they arc like a complex web.  Each house contain• everything that relates to man; and if one follows and analyoes each item of life, that is to say eacb. event upto its most delicate and subtle filaments at the source, ne would get lost at the intricacies in the interrelationships. For p,actical purposes however, certain teatures in each house have been einphasised and tho,c points of emphasis determine the significance of each house, as also with the planets. Each one of the planets is capable of giving and destroying, affecting events and determining the character of composite results. It is only the emphasis that make the difference. Against twelve hnuses there are the. nine 'Grahas' ; and there are minute sub­ c!ivisions in placing. This is the mathematical background.
   The Tenth considered as said above is a most 1important house. It is contiguous to the 9th which is considered as bhagya. The 9th and the 10th houses intertwine, that is to say, 'bhagya'

INDICATIOR 011' llllAVAS

and 'karma' intertwine are quite a good basia for correct predi­ ctions. Some assert that the fifth houso also is important, But then the lagna is the most important house, it takes precedence over the rest and the rasi (the house where moon is posited comes next, It is again a matter of cmphasfr,-all the twelve houses are important and should be reckoned within any complete work-out.
   If the Tenth bbava and its lord are good, good karma follows. As bas b•en explained previously if the 10th house is occupied by benefics or aspected by them it is good, if otherwise it is bad or weak.
   Rui : Ravi is also a factor in promoting a man's karma because he indicates progress in one's career, supremacy, administrative distinction etc. So, we must discuss bow and when Ravi helps rise a native.
   1. When strong Ravi aspected by a benefic occupies the !0th house he pavcs the way for even a poor man or a man who comes of very !cw soda! status to affluence and prosperity in life. Even a fo11rtb grade servant of an Institution rises to a very high position on account of powerful Ravi. Some eminent astrologers are of opinion that as an indicator of karma-lhav4 Ravi's presence in the bhagyasthan (9th pkce) will act advei-sely if the planet is not aspected by or associated -.vitb a benefic planet.
   In case of Dhanu lagna and Vrscika lagna Ravi will react favourably if he is in the 10th house, Readers would certainly appreciate the reason of this deviation. Fo,· Dhanu lagna Ravi being the 9th lord is very favourable in the 10th house, it is 'Kshctra Simhasana yoga' and in case of Vrscika lagna, Ravi himself is the lord of th 10th house.
  2. A weak Ravi when aspccted by or is in conjunction with malefi (or when he occupie" any du,tbana) gives unfavourable result and the subject has to cross many hurdles on his way to progress. Sometimes the native's strenuous efforts to ward off those obstacles do not yield satisfactory r sult.
   3. When Ravi is associated with SanHor both the planets oppose each other (i.e. one of them is in the 7th house from the other) even the best Raja yogas (very favourable yogas-we shall explain the term later on) do not give satisfactory result,

HlllDl)' S0ll!N0II 01' THI! l'OTURl!

   4. When Ravi and Sani are situated within 7i degrees from· each other even the most favourable yogas become less effective or we may say, in spite of best Raja yogas the subject can not thrive well.
   Positions of some of the indicator of Karma bhaTa and .of the 10th lord and results thereby are related herebelow :
   Wheu the lord of the tenth house in a birth chart is without any strength and indkators of Karmabhava, viz., Ravi, Vrhas­ pathi and Sukra also are weak the subject is apt to change his. mind off and on and cannot come. ,to any decision while occasion demands, and at the same time he indulges in anti-social activities.
How to judge Karma bhava ?
   in judging the merit of Karma bhava positional strength of Ravi, Vrhaspathi and Sukra and also their strength acquired


through different Vargas, their relation with other planets are to be considered. Of these three planets Ravi's role is very important and next are  Vrhaspathi and Sukra.  Again, while

*Thea.hove birth cha.rt  belongs to the boy born on the 11th Vaisak 1360 B, a.
{See Oha ter I), The cha.rt is a.na.lysed in the next page.

INDICATION OF BRAVAS

giving judgment about one's Karma the 10th bhava and its lcrd are to be taken into consideration. At the same time Ravi, Vrhaspathi and Sukra are to be considered as different lagnas; from those lagnas conditions of the 10th houses and their lord, are also to be examined. Furthermore, the 10th bhava is lo be taken as lagna and from that lagna too the strength or weakness of the 9th and 10th houses and of their lords are to be scrutinised. Let us elaborately explain these rules through an example.
   Let us examine the birth chart of the native who was born on the 17th Vaisak 1360 B.S.-30th April, 1953 (See Chapter I).
   First point is whether Lagnapathi Budha is strong or weak. Answer is he is in his debilitated house but is associated with Sukra who is exalted. So, Lagnapathi positionally is not weak. Aspect-he is aspected by Sani who is the 8th and 9th lord. Therefore his aspect on Budha is not all bad or all good. Both Sukra and Sani are friends to Budha. They are also tempora,y enemies to Budha. There is no other aspect on Budha. Hence, Budba has acquired medium strength,  Budha is also the lord of the 4th house and Sukra tho lord of the 5th place. So, the native may have fairly good education.
   There is another very favourable yoga. From Chandra Sukra and Bud ha are in the 6th place and Vrhaspathi is in the 8th house. (Of co tse Vrhaspathi is in conjunction with Mangal). This is Adhi yoga-but the full favourable effect of this auspicious yoga is not possible on account of conjunction of Vrhaspathi and Mangal. The next point-Ravi is situated in the house	f exaltation. Therefore position of Ravi the principal indicattir of 10th bhava is good. From Ravi th,e 10th place is occupied by Rahu, this is not gocd, and the lord of that 10th bhava, viz., Saai is in the 6th place from Ra vi.		This is also not favourable. In this manner the other indicators of 10th bhava, viz., Vrhaspatlli and Sukra are to be examined.	Apparently the chart is to some ex.tent powerful as there are other yogas such as Sunapha a"d Anapha yogas. The native has passed creditably Indiao Adminis­ trative Service (I.A. S. ) Examination and is now posted as Deputy Magistrate in West Bengal. On account of the presen€e of Sukra and Budba in the 10th house from lagna the father cf the native held a high post in a private Company. Formerly he was a major under Indian Military Service.
15

HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FU:rURB

This is how the 10th house is to be judged.
Further informations about 10th house, its lord and Ravi :
   We have already told above th•t the 10th house indicates Father and his prosperity. In an anthropomorphical or physical sense, thigh is also indicated by Ravi.
   If the 10th bhava or its lord, or the natural indicator of 10th bhava, i.e. Ravi becomes unfavourable  due to  unfavourable
,ituation (position in a house), aspect by or conjunction with nulefic planets the health of the native·• father may go wrong, his progress in vocational cueer may be thwarted, at the same t,me the native himself may be attacked with any kind of disease in his thigh.
   If Mangal is there in the 10th house the native may be involved in any kind of accident (through fire, weapon or fall etc.) or may have painful pimples over face.
   Sani in the 10th house causes morbid affection of the nervous system. The native may be injured owing to fall from a tree, or high place or he may be wounded by a fourfooted animal, or by a wooden log or club.
   If Rahu and Sani or Ravi and Sani are posited in the 10th houoe some of the nearest relatives of the native's own family may commit suicide by hanging.
Death or Parents :
   When birth is at day time Sukra is indicator of mother, if it is night the indicator of mother is Chandra. So, if Sukra is aspected by or is in c,njunction with malefic planets the mother of the native may die a premature death when the birth takes place at day time. Similarly Chandra under the ahove circumstance may kill the mother if the birth is at night. Only on the basis of these rules the native's mother's death should not
\Je prophesied. Mother cannot d•e if she has long or compa­ ratively good medium life. In such cases she may fall badly ill.
If Ravi is posited in the 10th place from lagna and is aspected
by Sani and Rahu;  or
   if Ravi or Sani· being in the 8th house is aspected by Man gal death of the father is possible.
   Following planetary configuration may be the cause of father's death :

INDICATION 01!' BHAVAS	227

   (a) If the subject is born at night, and Sani and Mangal are posited in the 7th place from Ravi; or
(bl  Ravi  while  associated  with  Mangat IS aspected by
Sani; or
  (c) Sani and Mangal are conjoined together and are aspected by Ravi; or
(d) When Ra vi is hemmed in between two malefics, or the
is associated with a malefic, and from Ravi the 7th place is occupied by any other malefic planet.
ERrning of Money :
   (a) If both the lagna and the !Ott house are owned by one and the same planet (in case of Kanya & Mina lagnas it is possible) or the lords of lagna and the 10th house are posited in oae and the same rasi the native earns good amount of money by dint of honest labour.
   (b) If lords of lagna and the 10th house are conjoined with each other the native earns money with the help of a Sudra (low caste man).
   (c) If the above two lords are in conjunction with Rahu (ascending node) or Ketu (descending node) the subject earns money with the help of a Mlechha (a man who is not a Hindu and at the same time is considered 1.0 be a non-believer in Vedas).
   (d) If the aforesaid lords are associated with Vrhaspathi the native is favoured with employment by the king of the land, earns good money and holds a respectable status in society.
Position, distinction in Social life and in professional career:
   I. If the 10th lords of these trio viz., Lagoa, Ravi and Chandra are strong and related to each other favourably, they give beneficial result during their dasa-antardasas in the following manner:
(a) The native may earn good amount of money, or may
prosper in his vocational career.
  (b) he attains distinctive position in his profession or vocation, or
(c) he attains respectable status in society.
   2. If Ravi in the 10th place is exalted, or is in his mool­ trikona house the native attains high status in his professional (;areer and also in society by dint of his merit and efficiency.

228	HINDU SCIENCE OF 71:!B P'U7URE

   3. If lagna, dhana (2nd place) and the 11th houses are occupied by strong beneficial planets the native thrives welt financially and leads a happy life. These good results may occur during the dasa-antardasas of those planets.
Means of livelihood or nature of profession :
   Determination of the. means of livelihood is as may be expected, the most common hurdle that an astrologer has to take. The effects of planets and houses have been set forth in detail in various books on astrology but in actual practice it is not easy lo reach a definite finding.
With the advancement of Science immense scope of various
types of professions have opened to the people. We may classify them as far as practicable in the following manner :
   1. Intelligentsia class: lawyer, professor, teacher, priest, philosopher, judge, attorney, astrologer, astronomer, psycho­ analyst etc.
2. Profession  regarding Economics & Finance :-Banker,
Auditor, Insurance worker, Financial adviser etc.
   3. Profession relating to Fine Arts etc, :-Musician, actor, dancer, dramatist, painter, poet, story or fiction writer, etc.
   4. Profession relating to machineries, industry, factory, electricity and other technical works etc, :-Engineer, Mechanic, Industrialist, Manufacturer, Organiser of Electrical works.
5. Profession of a physician, doctor, surgeon etc.
  6. Besides there are innumerable professions such as horticulturist, clerks, servants in a shop, day labourers, etc.
7. Military men and police etc.
   Now, Budha and Vrhaspatbi are the two planets that principally indicate Intelligentsia class.
   Sukra controls art, artistic talent, acting, music, drama and dramatist, painting, poetry-writing. physician, Engineer. Again, Budha indicates clerkship, business, education. Vrbaspathi also stands for education, so also Sukra. Sani's indications are analytical work, day labourer, labourer in general. Rahu and Ketu generally indicate clerkship, conventional work etc. Man gal stands for·soldier, police, surgeon, archa:ologist, geologist, etc.
   It is clear to our intelligent readers that the list of profesaions as said above is incomplete, we simply give an idea about the

lNDIO.&rION OF BRAVAB	229
manner of classifications and indication of some professions ruled by different planets.
   We again draw the attention of our readers about some other important points to enable them to judge the Karma bhava and 'Profession of a native.
(a) Whether the 10th house is occupied by any planet.
  (b) Whether the 10th house is aspected by any planet or remains unaspected.
(cl  Whether there is more than one planet in the !0th house.
   I. If the 10th house is occupied by any planet we shaU have to find out the Navamsa lord of that planet occupying the 10th place.  Now, the stronger of these two planets (i.e. the planet that occupies the 10th place and his Navamsa lord) will be the indicator of native's profession.
   2. ff the 10th place remains unoccupied by any planet the stronger one between the 10th lord and his Navamsa-lord will indicate the profession of the native.
   3. If the 10th place is occupied by two or more than two planets and they are equally strong then the native may pursue more than one profession.
Strength of a planet is to be judged according to positional
and dire;tional strength, strength of aspect and also strength cquired through different vargas.
   There are different opinions of different schools of thought. No one class of astrologers agree with another. Commonly 'Prevalent and almost dependable opinions of eminent persons are related herebelow. On the basis of these rules our readers may experiment them and find out satisfactory solutions.
Besides  the rules explained  earlier  in  this chapter the
followini rules should also be applied.
We give below some of the rules.
   1. The strongest planet among Ravi, Chandra and Lagnapathi will denote the nature of profession of the native.
2. Strongest Navamsa lord of Ravi, Chandra and Lagna may
indicate one's profession.
   3. We shall have to find out the strongest planet among lord& of the 10th house from llavi, Chandra and Lagna. Then th,· Navamsa lord of that planet will indicate the profession of the
,subject.

230	HINDU SCIBNOB 011' THE l"IJTURB

   These rules are approved to be a dependable by majority of astrologers,
   4. Further it is said by astrologer& of high reputation that if Ravi and Chandra are situated in lagna the Navamsa lord of the Karroapathi (i.e. the lord of the 10th house from lagna) will be a determining factor in matter of professicn.
   5. Another opinion supported by majority of astrologers :­ Find out the Navamsa lords of Ravi, Chandra and Lagoa. The strongest of these planets, in their dasa-antardasa will give the clue about one's profession.	If all the Navamsa lords are equally strong the native may undertake the vocation indicated by all of them during their dasa and antardasas.
   The weakest planet of these three Navamsa lords if adversely influenced by any malefic the native shall sustain monetary los,, and that weak planet will not signifiy any profession at all.
   There is a very important point which should not be overlooked. If tLe birth chart does not show any yoga for change of profession or vocational career it is hardly believable that the strongest or equally strong planets referred to above will
help the native pursue any new profession of that indicator planet.
   Our experience is that where there are signs of changes (in the birth chart) in a vocational career the native earns money through the profession indicated by that or those planets during their dasa-antardasas. Even lords of the 2nd, 7th, 11th and other Kendra and Kona houses, if favourably disposed will give the same result.
6. Eminent astrologers are of opinion that planets forming
specially favourable yogas (such as Raja yoga, Dbana yoga) and also the planets related to those favourable yogas will signify the nature of nativc's career.
   Let us take an instance of 'Adhi yoga', a very favourable yoga that makes a man highly prosperous. The· subject who is born under this yoga may rise to a very high position both socially,
;,olitically and professionally.
   The yoga is formed by favourable Budha, Vrhaspathi and Sukra being in the 6th, 7th or 8th separately or together from Chandra or lagna. The first one is called Chandradhi yoga and ktter one is Lagnadhi yoga.  This yoga is found in the birth

INDIOA'.rION OF BHAVAS	231
chart of Late Dr. Rajendra Prasad, the first President of Indian Union, There are some other important favourable yogas sucln as Sunapha and Anapha yogas. These yogas will be discussed elaborately later on. The planets forming ,hese yogas will help the native choose his vocational career according to their significations.
   Descriptions of planetary combinations and indiutions of vocation are briefly described herebelow :
   (a) When favourable Maogal and Vrhaspathi are combined together or related to each other by aspect or exchange of places the native hc,lds a very respectable post in police Department, or as Mangal is one of the yogakarakas he may bold a high office in military organisation too.
   (b) If Mangat and Budha are related in the same manner the native may be a mathematician.
   (c) If yogakaraka planets are Ravi and Budha and they are strong the subject may be a good lawyer, Advocate or Barrister, Attorney or Accountant.
   (d) If favourable yoga is formed by Budha and Sukra the native may be an Engineer, Medical practitioner, a succes,ful Chemist of great repute.
  (e) Combination of Budha and favourable Sani makes the native a responsible officer in any chemical iustitution.
   (i) Relation between Chandra and Vrhaspathi is a specially beneficial yoga that gives the native a chance to become king's minister, a great educationist, a noted officer in any Govern­ mental department and famous politician.
   (g) Due to combination of Chandra, Budha and Sukra the subject may be a literary person, a journalist, poet or an artist.
   (h) Again, combination of Ra vi, Bud ha and Suk ra makes a man a great artist, a renow11ed poet, and an illustrious writer. See the horoscope of the great poet Rabindranath Tagore.
   (i) Relation between Sukra and Budha is a powerful yoga that makes the native a successful Engineer, a very good photographer or a contractor.
  (J) Relation between Chandra and Sukra is also an equally good yoga that makes the native a successful actor, dramatist or a cinema director.
This is also to be remembered that planets, Rasi and Nakshatra

HINDU SCIENOI! OF THI! FUTUl!I!

-all ol them have different roles in deciding the nature of profession and prediction will be accurate if the learned astrologer makes proper cohesion of the qualities of these trio.
   Occupation of 10th lord in different bhavas and results thMeof:
1st  house-If  the lord of the 10th house (Karmapathi) is
situated in lagna the native may be sickly in his childhood, &t young age, he will be healthy and by and by he will be pri.>iperous.
2nd,  3rd  &  7th  houses-The  native  will be meritorious,
efficient, a good speaker and truthful.
   4th house-The native will be learned and wise, valorous, devoted to gods, pious and may be favoured by king.
   5th & 11th houses-The native will be always cheerful; he will be truthful, happy and rich and may be blessed with sons.
   6th & 12th houses-T 1e native may suffer much due to activities of enemies, may e cunning and be seldom happy.
   8th house-The nativ will be cunning, wicked, a thief, a liar and may torture his mother.
   9th house-The native will be lucky, educated, wealthy and longlived.
10th  house-The  native  will  be  financially  very affluent,
prnsperous, honourable and may make name end fame.

Eleventh house
(Aya bhava)
   Eleventh house signifies gain in every way, all kinds of receipts, acquisition of gold and wealth, paternal prosperity, eldest brother or sister, paternal uncle, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, brother-in-law ( sister-in-law too), knee, shank, ear, skill in practical arts etc,
   Difference between a.ya (11th) and dhana (2nd) bhavas is, from the 11th house we know whether income is easy or not, how or in what manner-honest or dishonest the native shall earn money. All these are to be found out from the 11th bhava. Dhana bhava indicates amount of income, accumulation of wealth; source of income can be determined from dhana and A.ya bhavas. Both the bhavas are complementary to each other. If the dhana bkava or its lord is afflicted due to aspect or conjunction of

INDIOA.TION OF BHA.VAB	233
malefic planet1 gain of money will not be easy, there must be some sort of difficulties in earning, so also the case with the 11th bhava.  Thorough  judgment of ii.ya  bhava  is to be made
..1ccording to instructions noted in case of other bbavas.
   At the present time material values or to put it more directly, money values, the profit-and-loss nexus rules out nearly every other value. This in itself is the result of planetary evolution; but into cosmic scheme, we do not pretend to enter. The day-to­
-day effects are however concretely appreciable, for they affect us at every step. And eminent astrologers reinforce their theoretical inferences and conclusions by references to experience when they assert that the malefic, so called have the power of bestowing on the native much greater wealth and importance to a very much greater extent than the so called benefic planets. The latter might have been more powerful in their own time, the Golden Age ; but now the Ages of lead and evil ones are more powerful.
   Not that benefics utterly fail to redeem their promises in terms of money and influences, but the native gets only the irreducible minimum from them and hardly more. The malefics
-on the other hand, if they are well-placed, that is, in giving mood, usually give a lot more than the benefics do in money and influence.
   Occupation of the lord of 11th house In different bhavas and results thereof:
   J. If the lord of the 11th house occupy lagna the native becomes pious, generous, joyful, good orator and a valorous person. But he may be short lived.
   2, If the 11th lord is posited either in the 2nd or 3rd house the native visits holy places.  He is tactful, generous and highly
.,xpensive and may suffer from any kind of colic pain.
   3. If the 11th lord occupies 4th or 5th house the native attains sncces,s in all his endeavours, he is blessed with sons and leads a happy life but he may be an impious man.
4. If the 11th lord is situated in the 6th, place the native is
-sickly, Jives in a foreign land, often troubled by enemies, and is an humble servant of others.
5. If the lord of the 11th place is in th  7th or 8th house the
native may have many virtues, he is active and noble minded,
His wife dies a premature death or he has no peace in conjugal

!!34	HINDU SCIBNCl!I OF THl!I FUTURE
life, This is particularly true if in the birth chart of a Kanya­ lai:na Jataka Chandra (11th lord) is situated in the 7th place,
   6. When the 11th lord is posited in the 9th or 10th place the native is honoured by the king of the land. He is intelligent, clever, truthful, wealthy and always sticks to his own religious belief.
  7. If the 11th lord is situated in the 11th place the nativc becomes an orator, a poet and a learned man.
   8, If the lord of the 11th house be in the 12th place th c native likes the company of followers of different religion.  He is lascivious, debauch and poor.

T.welftb house
(Vyaya bhava)
   Twelfth house signifies expenditure, monetary loss, debt, punishment pronounced by lawful court, enjoyment and sufferinr ,. information about enemy, bedroom enjoyment, expenditure for just cause, salvation etc.
   1. A benefic planet occupying the 12th place makes the native live happily, he earns name and fame, he spends money for just cause.
2. Kelli in the 12th is the cause of salvation.
   3. Sani, Ravi and Mangal being in the 12th make the native extravagant. He seldom enjoys material happiness, may not get family peace, and there is chance of his suffering from various ailments including disease in anus and eye.
   4. If the 12th bhava falls in a movable sign (rasi) and swift moving planets or lords of dusthanas (6th, 8th and 12th places) are there or the bhava is conjoined with or aspected by Sani·the native aimlessly travels over forests and many countries.
   5. If Sani and Rahu are in the 12th and aspected by a benefic planet the native earns money by dishonest means. The native may be involved in an accident through fire, may suffer from boils and disease in ears or l•fl leg, particularly if Mangal is posited in the 12th house.
   6. (i) If Chandra be in the 12th place there is chance of drowning.
(ii) If Ravi and Mangat be in the 12th place there is chance
of accident through fire.

INDICATION OF llHAVAB	230
   (iii) If Sukra be in the 12th place there is chance of courting insult due to illegal association with other's wife. But Sukra in the 12th place makes a man prosperous,
(iv) If Budha  be in the 12th place there is chance ofloss of
money due to activities of enemies.
(v) When a powerful malefic be posited in the 12th place the
native rules over his enemies.
   (vi) When a powerful planet owning any dusthana, viz., 6t . 8th or 12th house is posited in the 12th place the native prospers in life.
   Occupation of the 12th lord in different bhavas and results thereof:
   I. If the 12th lord be in lagna or 7th place the native', relation with his wife may not be cordial, or he may lead the life of a bachelor. He may be handsom, sickly, may be suffering from disease of cough and cold and is bereft of education and money.
   2. If the 12th lord be in the 2nd or 8th place the native is­ truthful, sweet-tongued and extravagant and he has many virtues and is devoted to Lord Vishnu.
3. If  the lords of lagna and  the 12th place together ane
posited in the 2nd the native develops an extravagant babit due to which he may be involved in debt.
4. When the lord of the 12th place be posited in the 3rd or
9th house the native may be hostile to his wife and i• miserly.
   5. If the lord of the 12th be in the 10th or 11th house the native'• relation with his sons is not cordial and his earning is comparatively small.
   6. If the same lord be posited in the 6th or 12th place the· native wishes his mother's premature death, he is a sinful mar.. and a debauch.

CHAPTBR-X
Beneficial planets according to different Lagna

   We have already discussed about peculiarities of Nakshatras (constellation) and planets. We have also seen that each planet signifies many things. To judge a birthchart we must be thoroughly acquainted with signification ( karakata ) of each planet. Let us take an example :
   Ravi is a natural significator of Karma (action), vocation, father etc. Vrhaspathi signifies learning, intellect, cb;ldren etc. and so on.
   If these planets are afflicted their virtues may be lost for the native or if they are well disposed and strong the native will be endowed with qualities of those planets.
   Maharshi Parasara has introduced a new chapter to show that a planet under certain conditions may be a karaka (significator) of another if both of them ere in kendra from each other and also from lagna.  But to produce result of the  karaka planet
both of them should be placed in their own, exalted, mooltrikona or friendly house.
   Say, Vrhaspathi is in Karkata, Sani in Tula, Mangat in Makar, Ravi in Mesa and Lagna in Karkata. Each of them is in his exalted house and is in Kendra from Lagna. They are also co-related by being placed in Kendra from each other. Therefore each of them will signify each other qualities in their dasa and antardasa. Such as, though Sani is the 8th lord and Vrhaspathi the lord of the 9th the native will be lucky and prosperous during Sani's antardasa under the major dasa of Vrhaspathi.
Here Sani's karakata is identical with that of Vrha1pathi.  It
means Sani will produce the result of Vrhaspathi in Vrhaspathi­ Sani's dasa-antardasa. Similar is the case with Mangat and Sani, and Ravi and Mangat,
   Kendra and Kona : Of the 4 kendras (viz., lagna, 4th, 7th and 10th places from lagna) 4th place is stronger than lagna, 7th is stronger than the 4th, and the 10th is stronger than the 7th bhava. So, a planet in the·10th place from lagna will be most effective among other planets in any other kendra,

lll!Nl!FIOIAL FLANl!TS ACCORDING TO DIFFERENT LAG!IIA	237

Benefic or malefic bbans and their lords :
   J. The 5th and the 9th bhavas are specially called 'dhana­ sthana•' (wealth giving bhavas) and the 4th and the 10th bhavas are 'Sukha-sthanas' (sukha=happiness,sukha-sthana means place of happiness).
   These four bhavas (5th, 9th, 4th and 10th) are favourable. Lagna is both kendra and kona. It is not as powerful as any one of those kendra-kona houses and the 7th bhava being a maraka­ sthana (death inflicting bhava) is not very favourable.
   2. The 2nd and the 7th bhavas are called maraka-sthana•­ (death in icting bhavas) and so lords of those places are taken as marakas. Excepting Ravi and Chandra all other planets may bring about death of a native. Rahu and Ketu, and also lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th can be marakas.
   If Ravi and Chandra are related to any other maraka planet by combination, conjunction and aspect they may act as death inflicting planets.
   3. Natural benefic planets when own any kendra are taken to be unfavourable and natural malefics also will be considered as inauspicious if they are lords of any kendra.
   • This sloka of Parasari Hora is said to be misquoted by some authors and commentators.  The Sloka reads thus :­
"Kendradhipathyas soumya suvam naiba dishanti cha Cruras naiba suvam kuryus konapau suvadayakou"
   Some eminent commentators say that the reading will be "naibiisuvam" meaning not asuvam-that is 'not unfavourable'. Their contention is that natural favourable planets owning any kendra are inauspicious and natural unfavourable planets owning any kendra will be considered as auspicious. Generally this version is supported by many experienced astrologers. The author of Laghu Parasari (or Ududaya Pradip) says that natural malefics owning kendra are beneficial. Regarding natural benefics the author supports Pariisari Hora.
• •  Natural benefics-Vrhaspathi, Sukra, Budha and waxing
Moon.
Natural malefics-Ravi, Mangal, Sani, Rahu, Ketu and waning Moon. Budha is malefic when conjoined with other malefies.

238	HI!IDU SCIENCE OF Tl!E FUTVR E

   4. The lords of the 2nd and 12th houses are called 'Para-tantras' (meaning their good or evil effect is subject to their position in favourable or unfavourable bhavas or relation with other benefic or unfavourable planets).
   5. The lords of the 3rd, 6th and 11th bhavas and also the 8th lord are inauspicious planets.
6. The lords of the 2nd and 7th houses are marakas.  Of
,hese two 7th lord is a more powerful maraka than the 2nd lord. According to Laghu Para.sari 2nd lord as a miiraka is more powerful than the lord of the 7th.
   It is said that the lords of the 2nd and 12th houses are 'para-tantras'. Let us elaborate this version by citing an example. Say, 2nd lord associated with the lord of the 9th or 10th house will give good result ; on the other hand if be is associated with an unfavourable planet or is posited in any inauspicious house the result will be bad.
   7. Natural beneficial planets become malefic if they own 3rd, 5th or 11th house. The lords of these three houses are called "Trisadayadhipathi" ('tri' means three, 'Sada' means six, 'A.ya' means Eleventh).  Of these trio 11th is the worst, 6th worse and the 3rd is bad.
   8. Eighth house is the twelfth place from the house of luck (i.e. 9th house). Hence the 8th lord is inauspicious but if he is the lord of!agna he will not be considered very unfavourable.
   It is so in case of Mesa lagna. Mangal is the lord of lagna and 8th place and he is not considered as an unfavourable planet. But in case of Sukra of Tula lagna, who is also the lord of the 8th house was not directly declared as a papa in Parasarl Hora but commentators are of opinion that Sukra of Tula lagna is not favourable.
   However, of the natural benefics owning any kcndra Vrhaspathi is the most powerful papa, next is Sukra; next to Sukra is Budha and Chandra's fault as a papa is negligible or very less,
   9. Therefore, if Vrhaspathi being the lord of a kendra is also the lord of any miiraka-sthan ( 2nd or 7th place ) his death inflicting power is the highest and next is Sukra. Budha as a
,miiraka is less powerful in comparison to Vrhaspathi and Sukra.

Bl!Nl!P!CIAL PLANl!T3 ACCORDING TO DIFFERENT I.AGNA	239

   10. The planet-be he a natural benefic or. malefic, will be considered as inauspicious if he is the lord of a kendra and at the same time owns any one of the 3rd, 6th and 11th houses.
   11. The lord of the 9th even if he is a natural malefic or lord of any du-sthana (6th, 8th and 12th places) is deemed to be favourable.
   We shall see later on that of Mithune lagna Sani the lord of the 8th and 9th houses is not considered all good and his relation with the 10th lord Vrhaspathi will not produce Rajayoga.
   Similarly in case of Simha lagna Vrhaspathi being the lord of 5th (another 'kona') and 8th houses will not form any Rajayoga owing to his 8th lordship.
   Stbirakaraka: Sthira-karaka means under all circumstances karaka(a ascribed to each planet is fixed. This has been elaborated by Maharshi Parasara in the following manner:
   Between Ravi and Sukra the stronger one is Pitrikaraka (signifies father).
   Between Chandra and Mangal the stronger one is Matrikaraka (signifies mother).
   Now there is a special significance of each planet and bhava according to the situation of that planet as a bhava-lord under consideration. Let us explain :-
   (i) Specially Chandra denotes mother and 4th bhava from Chandra also signifies mother.
   (ii) Ravi is an indicator of father and also the 9th place from Ravi signifies father.
   (iii) Mangal denotes sister and brother and also brother of the native's wife and the 3rd bhava from Mangal indicates brother etc.
(iv) Budha denotes maternal uncle, mother's sister, wifo of
father's younger brother, wife of maternal uncle, stepmother etc. and the 6th bhava from Budha signifies maternal uncle etc.
   (v) Vrhaspathi signifies son and daughter, master, grandfather and 5th bhava from Vrbaspathi denotes children.
(vi) Sukra denotes wife, parents, maternal grandmother etc.
and also the 7th bhava from Sukra indicates wife.
   (Sukra's sthirakarakata denoting parents and maternal grand­ mother sounds queer to us.)
(vii) The 8th bhava from Sani indicates death,

240	HINDU SOIENOE OF TI(E FUTURE

   The 'Karakata' noted above is to be considered specially in judging a horoscope and also Astha Varga chakras.
   Mesa Lagna-Sani being the lord of the 10th and I Ith houses is unfavourable and is considered as a bhiidhak planet (planet of obstruction).
   Budha being the lord of the 6th house and Sukra a natural benefic being lord of the 7th house (a kendra) are unfavourable.
  Ravi is a benefic. Nothing has been said about Chandra and Mangat.
   Chandra is considered as ksheena (lean) after 8th day from the beginning of the day of the new moon. So. Chandra being the lord of the 4th house from Mesa will be considered as favourable if she is ksheena (lean or waning moon), and Chandra of the bright half owning a kendra will be unfavourable.
   Mangal though the lord of the 8th place will not be unfavourable as he is the lord of (Mesa) lagna.
   Vrhaspathi is the lord of the 9th and 12th places. As he is the lord of the 12th place, his good effect depends on some conditions in spite of 9th lordship. He will be beneficially effective if he is related to any other favourable planet.
   Sukra is the principal r..iiraka (death inflicting planet) on account of his ownership of the 2nd and 7th places. If any other malefic planet occupies any maraka-sthan (death denoting place such as 2nd, 7th, 8th places etc.) or any malefic is related to Sukra that planet will also be a miiraka.
The author of Bhavartha Ratnakara, a very old but short
treatise on astrology is of opinion that Sukra being the lord of the 2nd and 7th places can not himself be a miiraka (death inflicting planet) until and unless he is conjoined with other unfavourable planets such as Sani and Budha.  This opinion is not supported by Parasari Hora.
Vrsa Lagna-Vrhaspathi, Sukra and Chandra  are  papas
(malefics).	Ravi and Sani are favourable. Sani being lord of 9th and 10th himself alone is a	Rajayogakaraka planet. Vrhaspathi is capable of inflicting death if he is posited in the 2nd or 7th place or is related to the lord of the 2nd or 7th houses. As Mangal is the lord of the 7th house his capability of inflicting death should be stronger than any other malefic.  But
there is no remark about Mangal in Parasari Hora.

BBNEFIC PLANETS ACCORDING TO DIFFERENT LAONA	241

   Maharshi Parasara did not also mention any thing about lludba. Ududhaya Pradipa (or Laghu Parasari) mentioned that Budha is a paratantra (subservient to some condition) as he owns the 2nd place and he too may be a miiraka if he is related to any other maraka planet. This is supported by many commentators.
   Experienced astrologers of wide reputation are of opinion that though Sani is the lord of the 9th and 10th does not produce favourable result until and unless he is conjoined with any other yogakaraka or favourable planet, or unless he is situated in the 10th place from lagna. If he is in the 2nd place the native no doubt becomes financially affluent and popular, but in the long run Sani ruins the native financially and he becomes isolated from his near and dear ones. According to Bhavartha Ratnakara dhanayoga is caused by combination of Vrhaspathi and Budha, but this yoga will be defunct if Mangal joins or aspects them.
Mltllana Lagoa-Ravi, Mangal and Vrhaspathi are papas.
Only benelic planet is Sukra being the lord of the 5th.
   Relation between Vrhaspathi, the lord of the 7th as well as 10th and Sani the lord of the 8th and 9th houses will not produce any Rajayoga until any other benefic planet joins them by aspect or combination in which case Raja yoga will be effective.
   Chandra the lord of the 2nd is not capable of inflicting death unless some other papa planet is related to Chandra.
   According to Bhavartha Ratnakara a brilliant dhanayoga will be caused when Chandra and Mangal together are posited in the 11th and Sani in the 9th place from Lagna. The author stresses much importance on the combination of Sukra, Chandra and Mangal being in the 2nd and is of opinion that the native becomes a wealthy man during Sukra dasa. Neither in Parasari Hora nor Ududhaya Pradipa ( Laghu Piiriisari ) there is any remark about Budha.
   Karkata Lagna-Sukra and Budha a re malefic planets, and Mangal and Vrhaspathi arc benefics. Mangal alone is a Rajayogakaraka planet but he himself alone is not capable of yielding favourable result unless he is related to any other favourable planet. Vrhaspathi is the lord of the 6th but the fault due to the 6th house-lordship is not taken into consideration as he is also the lord of the 9th place. Sani is the principal marak>
16

ll4ll	HINDU SOIBlfOB OJI' i'l!ll Jl'l1Tl1llll

on account of his owncnhip of 7th and 8th houses. Other malefic planets also can be miirakas if they are related to Sani.
   As Vrhaspathi is the lord of both 6th and 9th houses he shall give mixed result during his dasa.
   Some astrological savants are of opinion that in case of Karkata Lagoa if Vrhaspathi is in Lagoa, Ravi in the 10th and Budha and Sukra are seated in the 11th place the native becomes a famous king of good moral character. The yoga is termed as 'Mabarnjayoga' in Brihata-Jataka.
   Though Sukra and Budha arc said to be malefic some astrologers of high order say that Karkata-Lagna-Jataka becomes very rich during Sukra-dasa if Sukra and Budba arc poaitcd in the 12th house. Similarly they arc of opinion that Rajayoga is caused if Chandra and Vrhaspathi are posited in lagna.
  Slmha Lagna-Sukra and Budha arc unfavourable. They become miirakas if related to other papas.
   Mangal and Vrhaspathi are beneficial planets. Relation between Vrhaspatbi (5th lord) and Sukra (10th lord) does not cause Rajayo,;a because Sukra is the lord of the 3rd and Vrhaspathi the lord of the 8th. If other favourable planet is related to Sukra and Vrhaspathi Rajayoga result is expected.
   Chandra will give favourable r,sult if she is related to any beneficial planet and the result will be bad if she is related to any unfavourable planet.
   According to Parasari Hora Sani being the lord of the 7th is the most powerful miiraka but according to Laghu Piiriisari Budha as a death inflicting planet is stronger than any oth r miiraka..
Nothing has been said about Ravi.
   KIDya Lagna-Mangal, Vrhaspathi and Chandra arc papas. Sukra alone is favourable and relation between Sukra and Budha will cause Rajayoga. Sukra is a miiraka and next to Sukra death inflicting planet is Mangat. It is surprising tht Vrhaspathi's ownership of two kendras of which one is the 7th house bas been overlooked by Maharshi Parasara and he is not declared as a maraka. Even he i$ not placed in the second category of miirakas. No commentators thought it right to discuss this point. However, experience shows Sukra being the principal miiraka cannot give favourable resnlt in spite of his lordship of

Jll!NEFIC PLANBTS ACCORDING TO DIFPIIIBBNT LAGNA	243
tile 9th, during his dasa-particularly his antardasa under the major dasa of any other papa planet. During such dasa and antardasa Sukra may do immense mischief to the native in many respects.
   Relation between Sukra, the 9th lord and Vrhaspathi, the 4th lord and their positions in the 2nd houae will not cause any dhana-yoga.
   Shri B. V. Raman a very eminent astrologer in India in his comment said, "    in actnal practice it is found that Venus dasa
will be more beneficial than that of Jupiter because Jupiter becomes afflicted, being lord of a kendra.'' Vrhaspathi's fault as a lord of two kendras is no doubt great but Sukra's death inflicting effect is no lesi.-important.
   Readers may test the veracity of this statement and come to a decision..
As an example, a birth cl).art is given herebelow :
   Lagoa is in Kanya, Sani is in  Lagoa, Rahn and Chandra in the 5th, Vrhaspathi and Sukra in the 9111 and in the 11th house there are Ravi, Budha, Ketu and Mangal.
   The native is a fallen man. In spite of merit his education remained incomplete and during Vrhaspathi's antardasa under the major period of Sukra he suffered from extreme poverty.
Another example :
   La!fna is in Kanya associated with Sani and Rahn, Vrhaspathi and Sukra in the 2nd place, Ravi and Budha in the 3rd, Mangal in the 5th and Chandra and Ketu in the 7th house.
   The gentleman is an M.A. in Economics from Calcutta University and got degree from London School of Economics. He became a pauper during the dasa of Sukra and antardasa of Vrhaspathi.
Tula  Lagna-Vrhaspathi,  Ravi  and  Mangal  are  papas.
Relation between Chandra and Budha causes powerful Rajayoga, Sani being the lord of the 4th and the 5th is Rajayoga-karaka and Bud ha as the lord of the 9th is favourable. Sukra is not a miiraka but not favourable owing to ownership of the 8th house.
   Vrhaspathi is the lord of the 3rd and the 6th house. If he is situated in Lagoa he does not permit the native to pass a single day peacefully due to this or that ailment. I have seen number of horoscopes where Vrhaspathi is posited in Tula Lagoa and the

2H	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE

native almost everyday complains of this or that disease, some­ times minor and at other times very troublesome. Maharshi P.arasara said, "Of Tula Lagna Vrhaspathi is a 'khala" (meaning
\\,:icked:.  This is exactly what I saw in many cases."
   For this Lagoa Mangat being the lord of the 2nd and 7th is a miiraka. l:lut if Ravi, Budha and Sani are related to Man gal e,ther by combination or mutual aspect Mangal will be favour­ able to the native. Again, combination of Ravi, Budha and Sani with Chandra will do immense good to the native,
This is also to be noted that Vrhaspathi also may be a miiraka
if related to miiraka planets or posited in a malefic house.
Yrsdka  Lagna-Budha,  Mangat  and  Sukra  are malefics.
\'rhaspathi being the 2nd and 5th lord and Chandra the lord of the 9th house are benefic planets. Rajayoga is caused by the
,·cbtic'n between Ravi and Chandra.
   According to Parasari Hora Budha, Mangat and Sukra are marakas. But Laghu Parasari"s version is that Vrhaspathi is the principal maraka and Budha and other papa planets also may be C.eath-inflicting under certain circumslance. Maharsbi Parasara said in the chapter dealing in longivity that Rahu is considered tbe principal maraka in case of Vrscika and Makar lagnas,
   Sani being the 3rd and 4th lord is no doubt unfavourable. The ]rd house is not favourable but it is a upachayasthan. Sani being a natural malefic should not be considered as unfavourable as he owns a kendra. So, Sani ;hould not be declared as papa.
   Some commentators are of opinion that though strictly speaking Sani is not very unfavourable even then he can not produce good result.
   Parasara and other eminent authors opine that Vrhaspathi is bendicial due to his 5th house ownership but our experience is rhat Vrhaspathi being a maraka gives awefully unfavourable rcsuir and makes the native stranded financially.  Of course this
,s also to be noted that Vrhaspathi gives brilliant result if he is
1:e!ated to any yoga karaka planet.
   To quote Bhavartha Ratnakara we may cite the following yoga caused by Vrhaspathi, Chandra and Budha. According to that treatise, 'The native will be very fortunate and rich if Vrhaspathi and Budha are in the 5th and Chandra in the 11th hcn.: e-."

BRNEFIC PLANETS ACCORDING TO DIF.FERI.NT LAGNA	245

   Dbanu Lagna-According to Piirii3ari Hora Vrbaspathi, Sukra, Sani, Budha and Chandra are malefic planets.	Vrhaspathi due to lordship of kendra, Sani being the lord of the 2nd and the 3rd, Sukra as a lord of 6th and I Ith, Budha being the lord of 7th and Chandra as lord of the 8th house are considered as piipas. Sani is said to be death inflicting planet but why Budha has not been mentioned as miiraka as he is the lord of the 7th is not explained. Parasara's verdict in the beginning is that 7th lord as a miira ka is more powerful than the 2nd lord. Here he bas not
even mentioned Budha as a maraka.
   But in this respect Laghu Parasari has maintained consist­ ency,  The author has not ever mentioned 7th lord as a miiraka in preference to the 2nd lord.
   According to Laghu Parasori (or Ududhaya Pradipa) the 2nd lord Sani is maraka, Ravi and Budba are benefics and their relation by combination, aspect or exchange of houses etc. will produce Rajayoga. Mabarshi Parasara also said, relation between these two planets will give Rajayoga effec1 ; also Rajayoga will be caused owing to relation between Jhvi and Mangal.
   Though Vrhaspathi being the lord of a kendra may do immense good under certain circumstance.
   A native having his lagna in Dhanu, Vrhaspatbi m the 5th and Snkra in the 4th place from lagna got immensely good result during the major period of Sukra and snb-period of Vrhaspathi as Vrhaspathi being the lagna-lord is placed in the 5th and aspect, lagna. In latter chapter Mabarshi said tha't any planet aspecting lagna will have to be deemed as Yogakaraka and lord of lagna and the 4th house being in the 5th place will produce beneficial result. So, in case of Dhanu Lagna Vrhaspatbi should not be summarily dismissed as an evil planet.
   Makar Lagn-Chandra, Mangal and Vrhaspathi are malefics. Budha and Sukra are favourable planets. Ravi also is papa and Sani is the principal maraka. Mangat and other papas also can be maraka as and when Sani is powerful and well-disposed. In that case Sani's death inflicting power will be much minimised.
   Sukra being the lord of the 5th and 10th is the only Rajayoga­ karaka planet. Truly speaking Sukra is capable of producing Rajayoga result only when be is in the 5th house. His position

246	HINDU SOIENOE OF THE FUTURE
in the 10th will not help the native acquire money. name and fame and vocational career of the native will be most ordinary. This is due to Sukra's ownership of a kendra. Bui my experienee is that when Sukra is related to any other Yogakaraka planet and is posited in the 10th he is capable of conferring Rajayoga­ result. According to Laghu Parasari Ravi in spite of 8th house ownership and Chandra 7th house lordship are not unfavourable. In case of Makar Lagna Rahu is a powerful mii.raka. This was specially mentioned by Maharshi Parasara in case of Vrscika
and Makar Le.gna.
   X•mbha Lagoa-Chandra, Mangat and Vrhaspathi are malefics. Rajayoga is caused by the relation between Sukra and Mangal. Vrhaspathi is ,he death inflicting planet, Budha and other unfavourable planets also may become mii.rakas. Ra vi and Sani are unfavourable. Sukra though the lord of the 4th and 9th may not confer Rajayoga effect if he is posited in the 4th. Though Mangal is declared as a papa relation between Mangal (10th lord) and Sukra (4th and 9th lord) will produce Rajayoga. Ravi is the lord of the 7th house. He will not be a maraka but be may be responsible for suffering of the native due to bad health.
   Mina Lag,ia-Sani, Sukra, Ravi and Budha are unfavourable planets. Mangat and Chandra are benefics. Mangal though lord  of  the 2nd house is not a maraka.  Neither Maharsbi
Parasara nor author of Laghu Plirli,ari has declared Budha as a maraka  though  he owns the 7th house.  On the other hand it il
said that Sani and other unfavourable planets may be mii.rakas. Relation  between  Mangal and  Vrhaspathi  will	produee
Rajayoga. It is very interesting to note that though Vrhaspathi of Mina Lagoa owns two kendras he has not been mentioned as a papa but in case of Dhanu Lagna Vrhaspa thi has been classified in the same rank with other papa planets such as Sani. Sukra, Chandra and Budha. Why this differentiation was not discussed by any known commentator?
   We have seen when a natural benefic acts as a malefic under­ special circumstanc:es. Are we then to take it for granted that beneficient qualities of a natural Suva (favourable) planet are wiped out because of ownership of a kendra and of any of the 3rd, 6tb and 11th houses ?

BENBPIC l'LANETS .&OOOBDING TO DIFFERENT LAGNA	247

   Vrhaapathi is a natural suva (favourable) planet. In case of Mithune Lagna Vrbaspathi's fault as a lord of kendra has been magnified by all eminent followers of Maharshi Parasara. Malefic Vrhaspathi occupying 10th place which is his own house is said to be unfavourable. In such case our decision should be that career of the native will be very much disturbed due to presence of a malefic planet no less important than Vrhaspatbi. If any astrologer comes to such a conclusion it is bound to be wrong. Because good effect of a natural benefic can not be wiped out owing to his ownership of a kendra. So, in the above instance Vrhaspathi though has acquired fault as a kendrapathi will not be an obstructive factor in a native's career.  But bis fault as a kendrapathi will be manifested during his dasa and antardasa and also during the dasa and antardasa of Vrhaspathi and any other malefic planets. The vocational interest of the native will be hampered at that period.
But this is also a fact that if an auspicious planet be the lord
of the 6th, 8th or 12th house his malefic effect will be prominently felt by the native for all the time when the planet occupies any kendra, kona, 2nd or 11th place etc. If a planet owns both 6th and 9th houses his fault due to ownership of any dusthana (malefic bhavas) may be negligible.
• [Brihat-jataka  has  not  enunciated  any such theory.
According to that treatise lords of 6th, 8th and 12th houses as well as natural papa (malefic) planets are always inauspicious. Vrhaepathi, Sukra, waxing Moon and Budha when seated alone or conjoined with natural benefic are always auspicious planets. Again lords of kendra, kona are also favourable.]

CHAPTER-XI
Vlmsottari Dasa and Antardasa or Bhuktl
Or Period and Sub-Period
   Dasa and antardasa is a method devised by ancient Hindu Rishies to solve the question of timing events. It is yet a moot point to us to tell our readers definitely upon what basis each planet is attached a certain number of years as its term of dasa. 'But this also we cannot deny that in actual practice "dasa and antardasa" system gives very satisfactory result in making prophecies about period of events.
There are more than 40/41 dasa systems in Parasari Hora.
We have given in the following Paragraphs the names of all these systems which may interest some of our esteemed readers.
The Names of Dasa systems according to Parasari Hora :
I. Vimsottari   (120 yrs.)   21.  Kendr dasa
2. Sorasottari   (ll6 ., )   22.  Kiirakendra dasa

3. Dwadasottari
4. Asthottari
5,  Panchottari

(11.: ,,  )
(L>8 "	)
(l05"	)
23. 
Karaka graha dasa
24. Manduka dasa
25. Shula dasa

6.Satiibdika(100 .,)26.Nakshatra dasa7.Chaturashiti(84 ,,)27.Yogardha dasaR.Dwisaptati(72 ,.)28.Orig dasa9.S1Sthihayain(60 ..)29.Trikona d,sa10.S.11-trimsati(36 ,.)30.Na kshatrat-rasi dasa
11. Navamsa-Nava dasa (!OR)
12. Rasyamn dasa
13. Kala dasa
14. Chakra dasa
15. Sudarsana Chakra dasa
16. Cbaraparyaya dasa
17. Navamamsasthira dasa

31.  Tara dasa
3?.	Varnada dasa
33. Pa nchaswarli dasa
34. Yogini dasa
35. Pinda dasa
36. Amsa dasa
37. Rashmi dasa

18. Sthira dasa	38.  Nisarga dasa
19. Chatturvida-uttara dasa	39.  Asthavarga dasa
20. Brahmagrahashrita dasa	40.  Sandya dasa
41.	Panchaka dasa.
   All these dasa systems have been explained by Maharshi Parasara in his Pa;asari Hora. lnquistive students or astrology may try to apply some of them in predicting time of events with the  help of • Y  system other than Vimsottari and Asthottari

VIMSO:rTARl DASA AND ANTARDASA OR BBUKTI	249
systems which are  in  vogue  in  India.  Most  of  the  Indian
.as1rologers rely on either Vim,ottari or Asthottari dasa system and period of events in a man's life is calculated on the basis
-of any one of these two systems.
   In the Eastern part of India we have seen that some eminent professional astrologers have drawn Asthottari as well as Yogini
-dasa and mentioned the period of events on the basis of these two dasa systems only. But we shall in this book deal with Vimsottari dasa as elaborately as possible and draw tables of dasa
.and antardasa of both Vimsottari and Asthottari systems.
   Now we explain herebelow the method of calculation of Vimsottari dasa and bhukti. The method of calculation of dasas depends mainly on the position of Chandra in the birth chart and Nakshatra attached with this planet.
   We know each Nakshatra (constellation) covers 13° degree 20' minute (or kala). Each Nakshatra has a lord of its own and the dasa is to be calculated according to degree of Nakshatra
-consumed at the time of birth.
   Before we explain in detail the method of calculation of dasa and bhukti we draw herebelow the table of dasas indicated by each nakshatra. We shall mention the number of nakshat.as instead of naming them one by one. The number of nakshatra means Aawini I, Bharani 2, Krittika 3 etc.
Table of dasas ruled by each planet according to nakshatra :
Table of Vlmsottari Dasa


3,12,21,Ravi
64,13.22IChandra105,14,23/Mangat76,15,24'Rahu187,16,25Vrhaspathi168,17,26Sani199,18,27Budha1710,19,1Ketu711,20,2Sukra20
120 yrs_. 
   Total of these years is 120 which is considered as the maximum longivity of a man.  But this is not always correct

250	HINDU SOll!.lllCE OF :1:HB FU:l:U.BB
We heard of many men who lived more than 120 years of age. We shall work out the process of calculation of (Vimsottari dasa) dasa-bhukti at the time of birth of the child who was born on the 30th April, 1953 at 10 A. M. (L. M. T), Calcutta (See p. 69, Ch. III).
   Chandra is in Tula, Chandrasphuta 27'-52'. This means that Chandra is in Visakha Nakshatra No. 16. Visakha Nakshatra begins at 20• degree Tula and is extended upto 3'-20' Vrscika.
At the time of birth Chandrasphuta-6s-27'-52' duration ofNakshatra-7s  3'-20'
Therefore, 7s-3"-20' minus 6s-27"-52'
=0-5'-28' Visakha left unconsumed at the time of birth.
   Next step--If 13°-20' gives 16 yrs. (duration of dasa period of Vrhaspathi), what will be years for '-28'
13'-20'=800 Kala or minute,  5'-28'=328 Kala (min)
: . (328 x 16)-;- 800 =6 yrs 6m 211 days or 22 days.
   Therefore balance of Vrhaspathi's dasa-6 yrs 6m 22 days. Similar results can be worked out in a different way. As per Jogajjoti Panjika edited by Sbri N. C. Lahiri the Nakshatraman (duration of Nakshatra) is taken for calculation.
   The child was born on the 30th April Visakha Nakshatra covered only 36 danda 54 Pala 30 bipala. This means, the naksbatra began on the previous day.
   Let us consult the Panjika. We find Swati nakshatra terminated on the 29th April at 33 danda 55 Pala 38 bipala. (60 dandas make a day-I day means 24 hrs.) So, 60 danda minus 33 danda 55 Pala 38 hipala=26 danda 4 Pala 22 hipala.
   Duration of Visakha Nakshatra ( on 29th April )-26 danda 4 Pala 22 bipala + 36 danda 54 Pala 32 hipala ( duration of Naksbatra on the beirtb-day )=62 danda 53 Pala 54 hipala
  Or we should say, the total period of Visakba Naksbatra is 62 danda 58 Pala 54 bipala
htha danda is 11 danda 8 Pala 12 bii,ala +
26"	4"22"
=37" 12 "	34 11
          (Nakshatra already consumed on the previous day) Total period of Naksbatra=62 danda 58 Pala 54 bipala
Minus	37	"	12	"	34 "
(Nakshatra already consumed)
=2S	'1	46	"	20  ••
(balance of Naksbatra to be consu · D' eel

VIM:B<>T'rAlll DAU AND ANUIIDASA OR BB:UKTI	!!51

62 danda 58 Pala 54 bipala=226734 bipala
25	"	46  "	34  "	= 92794	"
: . 226734 : 92794 : :	16 yrs :	x
x-(92794 X 16)+226734=6 yrs 6m 17 days.
=Balance of Vrhaspathi's dasa.
   There is a difference of 5 days between dasa bhukti worked out accor ing to Chandrasphuta and Nakshatra-miin. Such difference is possible.
Calculation ofantardasa :
   There are more than one method of calculation of antardasa (sub-period). We give herebelow a few easy methods:
l.  Multiply the number of years of dasa of a planet by the
number of years of the dasa of that planet whose antardasa is to be determined. Divide the product by 10, the quotient will indicate months and the remainder is to be multiplied by 30, the product is to be divided by 10, the result will indicate days.
   Example-.Yrhaspathi's major dasa and his antardasa to be worked out.
16 X 16=256 + 10 = 25 momhs or 2 yrs I month
Remainder 6X 30= 180+ 10=18 days.
  Therefore, Vrhaspathi's subperiod under Vrhaspathi's major period=2 yrs Im 12 days.
   2. Multiply the number of years of major dasa-lord by the number of years of the dasa period of antardasa-lord. Divide the product by 120, the quotient will be years. The rem.ainder is to be multiplied by 12 and the product to be divided by 120. The quotient will indicate months. The remainder is again to be multiplied by 30 and. the product is to be divided by 120. The quotient stands for days.
   If the product obtained by multiplication of number of years of dasa lord by the number of years of antardasa lord is Jess than 120, the product is to be multiplied by 12 and the result thus obtained is to be divided by 120. The quotient will indicate months. Other process is the same as the previous method.
Example-To find out period of Vrhaspathi's dasa and Sani'•
antardasa.

rem.a.inder

16xl9=304+120=2 yrs
64X 12=768+ 120=6m
48x30=1440+ 120=12 days.

252	HINDU BCIFNCE 011' THE ll'CTURB
   Dasa-antarda•a period of Vrha•pathi and Sani=2 yrs 6m 12 days.
   3. Multiply the dasa period of major dasa-Jord by the dasa' period of the planet whose antardasa is to be determined. Then the last figure of the product is to be cut out and it is to be multiplied by 3, the product thus found will indicate days and the figure that is left out undisturbed will indicate months.
Example-Dasa and antardasa period ofVrhaspathi andSani- 16x19=304. The last figure 4X3=12 days.
The figure left out is 30 which indicates months.
   Therefore Vrhaspathi and Sani's dasa-antardasa period is 30 months 12 days=2 yrs 6m 12 days.
Antardasa bhu kties may be subdivided into 'Pratyantar'  dasa
{E11glish equivalent is inter period). Method of calculation is as follows.
   To find out Pratyantar dasa under the sub period of Chandra and major period of Ravi and interperiod of Mangal.
Example-Ravi's dasa X Chandra's dasa
=(6 x 10) + 120=6 months
6 x 7 (Ma ngal's dasa period) (42x30)+120 days=IO days 30 dandas.
  ( Period of Mangal's Pratyantar under Chandra's antardasa under Ra vi's major dasa ).
   The child was born during Vrhaspathi's dasa when the balance of this dasa was 6 yrs 6m 22 days. This means that out of 16 years of Vrhaspathi"s dasa period 9 yrs 6 months 8 days already expired when the child was born. We can now find out what antardasa under Vrhaspathi's major dasa was ruling at the time of birth.
Vrhaspathi's major dasa and itsantardasa period-2 yrslm 18 days
,,	,,	,,	Sani's	,,	,,	+2	6 ,, 12  ,.

.,	..	.,	Budba's	,,

4	-8  -  0
2	-3  -  6

,,	..
"	..

.. Ketu's	..
. "	Sukra's  ..

6	-11  - 6
  0  -11  -  6 
7	-10- 12
- 8-	0
10 - 6-12

This shows that at the time of birth Budha's antardasa under
,the major dasa of Vrhaspathi was running.

VIll{SOTTARI DASA AND ANTARDASA OR BHUKTI	253

Vimsottari Dasa and Antardasa _Table
Ravi's Dasa-6 yrs	Chandra's Dasa-10 yrs
antardasas (bhukties)	antardasas (bhukties)
1:·


Ravi

yr.	m.	d.
0	3	18


Chandra

IY;·	d.

Chandra

0	6	0

Mangal

0	7	0

Mangal






0	4	6

I

Rahu









I	6	0

	

		

		

		

Sukra

l	0	0

Ravi

0	6	0
---

l-6-!7>0

10 -0 0





Mangal's Dasa-7 yrs	I	Rahu's Dasa-18 yrs
antardasas (bhukties)	I 1	antardasas (bhukties)
Rahu	I	O	18 I	Vrhaspathi	2	4	24
Vrhaspathi	O	1 1	6 I	Sani	2	10	6

Sani	I	1

9 l Budhu

2	6	18

Ketu	O	4	27	S ukra	3	0	0
Sukra	I	2	0	Ravi	'  O	IO	24
Ravi	O	4	6	Chandra	I	6	0

_C_h_a_n_d_ra	
1

o_/_7 o
7 '	O	O

_M_a_n_g_a_1	
1

1	18
181	0	7i-


254	HINDU SOIENOB OF TllB FUTURE
Vimsottari Dass SDd A¦tardua Table


Vrhaspathi's Dasa-16 yrs antardasas (bhukties)
 
Sani's Dasa-19 yrs antardasas (bhukties)


Vrhaspathiyr. J
2m • 1d.
18
Saniyr.
3d.
3Sani2612Bndha29Budha236KetuI9
Ketu

o· 11	6

Sukra	3	0

Sukra Ravi Chandra Mangal Rahu

2 i 8 I o
0	9  18
I	4	0
0	II	6
2	4	24
16	7>,o

Ravi Chandra Mangal Rahu Vrhaspathi

0	11	12
I 7	0
I 1	9
2	10	6
2	6	12
!9()()






Bndha's Dasa-17 yrs	Ketu's Dasa-7 yrs
antardasas (bhukties)	antardasas (bhukties)


Budhayr.
2m.
4d.
27
Ketuyr.
0m.
4d.
27Ketu0II27Sukra120
Sukra	2
Ravi	0
Chandra	I
Mangal	0
Rahn	i

10	0
' 10	6
5	0
II	27

Ravi	0
Chandra	0
Mangal	0
Rahu	I	1

4	6
7	0
4	27
0	18

Vrhaspathi
Sani	8	9


Budha


0	11	27

 -		I 17

--o-- - 0

-0-	0

VIMSOTTARI DASA AND ANTARDASA OR BHUICTI	255
Vimsottari Dua and Antardasa table Sukra 's Dasa-20 yrs antardasas (bhukties)


()018020J
20
s0
0l Fundamental principles of judging dasa and antardasa
in predicting events.
It is an admitted fact that determination of timing events is
really a problem to astrologers. Dasa System devised by Hindu Rishies is roally a great step to solve this problem.  But though the system is there we must know many things before we venture to make any prophecy regarding period of events.  We shall give in the following paragraphs some clues which may be of much help to our readers in this matter.
   Fundamental rules for determining time of nents through dasa and antardasa.  They are by no means exhaustive :
   1. We know that each planet has his own significance. So, it is expected that a planet during his own dasa and antardasa will yield result good or bad according to his own significance. But actually this is not the case. A planet in his own dasa and antardasa will give his own significant results, but 'tempered modified or effected by its relations with other planets by co­ existence, aspecting or exchange of places.
   If there is none of these relations the planet during his dasa and antardasa will produce the result of such other planet as has similar characteristics with him.
   To cite an example let us take the case of Mangal of Karkat lagna. If Mangal is not related to any other planet he will give the result of Vrhaspathi during his dasa and antardasa. Because Mangat is a 'Raja yoga Karaka' planet and Vrhaspathi is the lord of luck (9th house). Further both the planets are friendly to each other and have been classified in the same rank.

256	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE

   2. When dasapathi (Major dasa-lord) and .antardasapathi (the lord of the subperiod) are inimical or antagonistic to each other (such as, major dasa lord is the owner of the 9th house and antardasa lord owns any malefic bbavas) the dasapathi in his dasa and antardasa of malefic planet will yield unfavourable result.
   In such a case we cannot expect a favourable result but if the dasa-lord is strong and favourably disposed result will not be very unfavourable.
3. If kendrapatbi (lord of kendra) or  konapathi (lord of
kona) are not related to each other the result ot tlleir dasa ,md antardasa will not be fa our&bk. There are exceptions:
   (i) If either of the 5th or 10th lord is not very unfavourably disposed or any one of the two is not very maliciously related to any malefic planet the dasa ana antardaoa of the 5th and the 10th lord will yield good result provided the 5th lord is conjoined with the lord of the 9th house.
(ii) If the lords of tile 5th and the 9th houses are conjoined
with each other subperiod of 4th or 10th lord under the major period of 5th or 9tn lord will yield f vourable result even if there is no relation between dasa ana antardasa lords.
   (iii) Antardasa of ,he 5th iord Ulllier the major period of the 10th lord or the li sa aull antaruasa of the 9th and the 4th or 4th and 9th lords will give beneficial result. Of course if these planets are related to each other the result will be very good.
   (iv) The lord of t<ie !Oto llousc when posited in the 5111 place and also when lord of tbe 10th house is conjoined with the 4th lord their dasa and antardasa alt  beneficial to the native.
(v) 11' the  loras of the 5th, IOtb, 4th and 9th places together
occupy any bhava theu da&us anu ant rdat:ias are favourable. Even if the lord of any other bhav.; is conjoined with them the dasa and antar<>asa of that planet also will produce beneficial result.
4. If a  malefic 1s related  to any  Rajayogakaraka  planet
during the antardasa ol the yogakaraka planet under the major dasa of the malefic oasa-antardasa result will be favourab[e.
   5. It is said in Parasariya Su-sloka Satakam (hundred best­ Slokas of Maharsbi Parasara) that Sani of Mesa or Mithuue lagna will not produce any Rajayogit.

VIMSOTTABI DASA AND ANTABDASA OR BHUKTI	257
   But according to that valuable book if a planet owns 6th and at the same time 7th house and is placed in the 10th pla.-, from lagoa and he is conjoined with any other planet his dasa and antardasa and also antardasa of that planet who is combined with the aforesaid lord of the 6th and 7th houses will produce favourable result.
Sani of Simha lagna occupying Vrsa rasi will cause this yoga.
   6. If one and the same planet be the owner of the 2nd and the 7th houses and occupies the 4th place from lagna his major dasa and antardasa of that planet combined with the dasapathi (lord of the major dasa) will be favourable.
7. ff a lord of any dusthana (6th, 8th and 12th places) be
 ••ociatcd with the 5th lord the daaa and antardasa cf those planets will be favourable.
   8. If the lord of the 4th is situated in the 10th and the 10th lord is in the 4th place tt.•,ir dasas and antardasas are favourable.
   9. When the 9th lord is in •he 4th and the 4th lord is situated in the 10th their dasas and antardasas are auspicious.
JO.  If  the  5th or the 9th lord is in the 10th place their dasas
and antardasas are favourable.
   11. If the lord of the antardasa is placed in the 12th place from the dasa-lord the native shall get unfavourable result during the period of antardasa lord under the major period of dasa-lord. If the lord of antardasa be the owner of 5th or 9th house the anfavourable result will be much less.
   12. If the 5th and 9th places from the dasa-lord are occupiec by Sani, Mangat, iRahu, Keto or Ravi the native suffers frc'A) mental worri s and anxieties during the dasa-lord and sub-petµ,,d of anyone of these natural papas. The native shall hav-,-no peace of mind.
If these  natural papas  are benefic  owing to lordsljip of
auspicious bbavas the first part of the antardasa will be bad and the last part will be favourable.
13. If the 6th, 8th or 12th place from a planet is occupied by
'Krura' planets (Mangat, Sani, Ravi, Rahu are Krura planets 'Krura' means cruel or very malefic) or anyone of those di;sthanas (6th, 8th and 12th places) is occupied by either debilitated or combust plan, during the dasa of the first named. planet and a11tardasa of ny  'Krura' planet enemies of the native will be
17

258	HINDU SOIENOE OF THE FUTUBE
very active to pull him down or to injure his interest, and the native shall incur displeasure of the head oftbe state, and •uffer monetary loss.
   14. If the 4th place from a planet is occupied by any 'Krura' planet during the maj,,r dasa of that planet and antardasa of 'Krura' planet loss of native's house and landed properties may be apprehended.
(i) If Mangal occupies that 4th place there is possibility of
arson, crash of thunder, sudden death of cattle, accident, or any other sudden danger.
(ii) If Sani is there in the 4th place the native shall suff r
from heartache, pain in the chest, rheumatism, or any other
.:isease owing to morbid affection of the nervous sys1em.
   (iii) If weak Ravi is posited in the 4th place from that planet during the dasa and antardasa period of those planets the native shall incur royal displeasure, he shall suffer from loss of money or any other property and there is chance of disturb nce in v cational career.
   (i•l If Rahu is in the 4th place from a plane( there is chance of theft of money or valuable articles, disease due to effect of any kind of poison or poisonous drug.
   15. If Rahu is posited in the 10th place from a planet during dasa and antardasa of that planet and Rahu ther is chance of going on pilgrimage to holy places, of visiting foreign lands or distant countries.
(i) Again if \he 9th, 10th or 11th place from a planet is
occupied by a benefic their dasas and antarda•as are favourable. The native acquires name and fame, earns money and gets education.
   16. If the 5th, 6th and 7th places from a planet are occupied by an exalted or auspicious planet the native is blessed with wife, children and royal favour during their dasas and anta•dasas.
   17. If the 4th place from a planet is occupied by an exalted planet or if that 4th house is the own or mooltrikona sign of the occupant the native possesses conveyances, builds his own house and earns good money during their dasas and antardasas.
   18. If the lord of the rasi where Chandra is situated is posited in the house of exaltation and is in kendra from lagna the native shall prosper, be wealthy, gain money through  agricultural

VIM90TTARI DASA AND ANTARDASA 01: BHUKTI	259
enterprise during the dasa of that exalted planet. I think, the native shall get beneficial result according 10 signification of that exalted planet.
   19. If lagnapathi is in his own NavJmsa, Dwadasamsa or drekkan his dasa will be favourable.
   (i) If Navamsa lord of lagnapathi is posited in friendly navamsa, drekkan or in his own navaA1sa, or lagnapathi is aspected by a friendly planet wbo is posited in his own, friondly navamsa, drekkan or dwadasomsa dasa of the Jagnapathi is beneficial.
A few important points should be noted carefully :-
  (I) If an exalted planet crosses his highest point of exaltation at the time of birth the first part of his dasa is favourable end the latter part will not be as favourable as the first one.
   (2) Similarly if a debilitated planet in the birth cl:rnrt cros•es the lowest point of debilitation the first of his dasa is unfavour­ able and tb last part is favourdble.
   (3) If a planet in ernltation in the birth chart is posited in the lowest point of debilitation the first part of his dasa is unfavotn­ s.rength to i-npart go d result and gives favourable result in the beginning of the dasa and at the end the result will be unfavourable.
   Reverse will be the result of the dasa of a debilitated plan:, occupying the house of exaltation in the navamsa chakra.
   (4) A planet loses bis strength if he is combust, conjoined with a papa or an enemy planet positioned in an inimical hou,e or if he occupies any dustbana (6th, 8th or 12th house).
   (5) The planet who is inimical to lagnapathi cannot give good in his dasa and antardasa of lagnapathi.
   The dasa of such a planet will not be very unfavourable if he is a temporary friend to the lagnapathi.
   (6) Those planets who occupy 4th, 9th or 10th place from lagnapathi cannot give favourable result if they are 'nimical w the lord of lagna, but if they are friendly to lagnapatbi the dasa and antardasa of lagnapathi will be favourable.
   (7) When two planets are situated in the 7th place from ea h other their dasa and antardasa will not be favourable. But in cases of'jeeba' yoga, 'Souri-Guru' yoga, 'Guru-Vaurua' yoga and

260	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE E'UTlJBB
Chandra being in the 7th place from Mangat or vice-versa their dasas and antardasas will produce beneficial result.
   [Jeeba yoga=Chandra and Vrhaspatlti being in the 7th place from each other. Souri-Guru yoga=Sani and Vrhaspathi being in the 7th place from each other and Guru-V.iuma yoga=Vrhas­ pathi and Mangat being in the 7th place from each other].
We have spoken very highly of Rajayogas hut this is tc be
remembered that a simple favourable yoga will be of no use or of less importance if yogakaraka planets dvnot gain strength. Their dasas and antardasas will really be productive of good results if they (yoga karaka planets) are strong and favourably disposed.
   We have said earlier that if the 4th lord is in the 10th and the 10th lord in the 4th the result of their dasa and antardasa will be beneficial but if those planets are aspected by lords of the 5th and 9th places this will be a very powerful Rajayoga and their dasa and antardasa will be very beneficient. Herc also the planets must be strong, otherwise Rajayoga will produce medium result.
Once the dasa and antardasa have  been established, the
process of deciding about their effects becomes the most important Matter. And in this, it is difficult to set down mechanical guide lines. One has to assess and valuate the power, the attitude, the proclivity and mood of each planet. And then the joined effect as the influences of other planets converge on the lords of the dasa and antardasa, where each is placed with reference to lagna and rasi, who aspects whom, who is friendly, who hostile and who neutral, and to what -}xtent-all this has to be considered not merely 'a priori', but with reference to some facts known to have actually occurred during the native's life.
   It is a mat:er also of the astrologers' own ability and e,;perience and of largely on intuition which operates only on the subconscious of extensive and intensive reading and hard diligent work.
Another ;,oint of capital importance-alas, sooften forgotten­
is that the contexts of mod rn society, of changed social condi­ tions, of the impact of day-to-day scientific and mechanical adjustments in daily life etc. is the bed-rock on which all current and contemporary predictive astrology is based. The astrologer himself can not get away from his contemporary sheet anchor of

VIMSOTTARI DASA AND ANTARDASA OR BHUICTI	261
his own life and escape to a vacuum and to make predictions in the 90th century with mechanical accuracy consistent with the shastras, but which would be apposite to the sixth and seventh century or to some such time when the shastras were written or compiled.
   To take a certain example olf the beat. Suppose the ancient texts lay that in a certain conjunction of planets in their dasa and antardasa the native would be atilicted by swarms of wild four or many-footed animals. Now if the predictive astrologer true to his texts and mechanically quite accurate deduces about a native who lives in a modern metropolis that he would be harassed by elephants or some such animals, he would be ridiculed and rightly. If he is a man of intelligence and experience, which are by no means ruled out by ancient texts, he might llnd the answer in mosquitoes. So, warning is that contemporary contexts should never be ignored.

CHAPTER-XII
Astottary Dasa and Antardasa
   We have already said that in Eastern part of India eminent astrologers would rely more on Astottary System than Vimso­ tta ry in predicting events. Now-a-days the system is not as popular as \'imsottary among most of the modern astrologers in Eastern part of India too on account of various reasons. Most of them put forward the argument that in 'Kaliyoga' Vimsottary dasa is more effective than Astottary. However as the Astottary System is still in vogue readers should know something about the system.
Order of dasa lords under this system is as follows :
Dasa Lord	Span of dasa
].  Ravi	6 years
2. Chandra	15  "
..
,,

.. 
Total=108 years
   Please note that Vimsottary dasa-lords arc 9, astotlary dasa lords are 8. According to Vimsottary System generally a man's longivity is taken to be 120 yrs. and according to as,ottary System generally maximum longivity of a man does not exceed 108 yrs.
Method of calculation of Antardasa :
   Multiply Span of dasa of both dasa and antardasa, divide the result by 9. The quotient is taken to be months. The remainder is to be reduced to days { of course multiplying the remainder by 30 ) and the result to be divided again by 9. The quotient will be days. If there is_ any remainder it is to be reduced to danda and the result is to be divided by 9. The quotient will denote danda.

ABTOTTARY DABA AND ANTARDASA	26S
   Example:	I. Chandra's major dasa and Mangal's antardasa to be calculated:  Chandra's dasa=l5 yrs. Mangal's dasa=8 yu.
So, 15 x 8=120 months+9=13 months. remainder 3 months to be reduced to days,
i.e. 3x30=90+9=10 days.
Therefore, 13 months 10 days=l yr. 1 m. 10 days.
2.  Mangal's major dasa and Sani's antardasa :
Mangal's major dasa=8 yrs. Sani's major dasa=IO yrs.
So,  8X 10=80+9=8 months, remainder 8 months
8 x 30=240 days+ 9=26 days, remainder 6 days,
6 x 60=360 danda + 9=40 danda.
Therefore, 8 months 26 days 40 danda.

Astottary Dasa Table



.."












10. Magha
11. Poorva Falguni

Total 15 yrs.

Mangat	2 yrs. 8 months
"	2  "	8

12. Uttar Falguni	"

2  "  ,g	"


Total 8 yrs.



13. Hasta	Budha
14. Chitra	"

4 yrs. 3 months
4 "	3  u

15. Swati
16. Visakha

.".

4 n	3
4 "	3
Total 17 yrs.

.".

264	HIIIDU SOIBIIOB 01" THE F'OTUBB
17. Anuradha	S.a.ni	3 yrs. 4 mo.n.ths

18. Jeatha

3	.. 4

19. Moala	3	.. 4	"
Total 10 yrs.
20. Poorbasarha	Vrha..spathi	4 yrs. 9 months
22. Sravana	7  ,, 1  ..	IS  ..
Total 19 yrs.
23. Dhanistha	Ra..hu	4 y.r.s.

24. Satavisa

4 ..

25. Purva bhadrapada	4
Total 12 yrs.
26. Uttarbhadrapada	Su..kra	5 yrs. 3 mon..ths

27. Revati

s ..	3

....

1. Aswini	"	5 "	3
2. Bharani	5 ..	3
Total  21 yrs.
Method of Calcnlation of the Balance of Das• at the time of birth of • native
Let us explain this by an example :
   Illustration No. I. Readers will kindly look to the birth chart of the boy born on the 30th April 1953 (See p. 69). His birth star is Visakha. ·This means, at the time of birth Chandra was associated with Visakha Nakshatra. This indicates that the boy was born in Budha's dasa (See table). Dasa-Milna (Span of dasa-period) und r this Nakshatra is 4 yrs. 3 month1. Istha­ danda is 11 danda 8 pala 12 bipala (omit 30 anupala).
Total  span  of Visakha  Nakshatra (of the birth-date) is
62 danda 58 pala 56 bipala
Nakshatra bhukti	37	.,	12  .,	36	.,
,.	bhogya	25	.,	46  .,	20	.,
• Jbhukti means period consumed	} tbhogya	.,	.,	to be consumed
   To find out Naklhatni-man. bh11k'1 ancl bhogya plea¦e oonau1' ih• pncbanp ol 1860 B.S. daled 171h Baiaakh, Thura<lay. We &aok lhe help of Bu-Bidclhanta Panjlka of thal yaar.

ABTOTTARY DASA AND ANTARDASA	265
62 danda 58 pala 56 bipala = 226736 bipala
25	,.	46  ,,	20	,.	= 92760	,.
Now by Ruic of three,
226736 bipala giVtJ 4 yrs. 3 months or 51 months 92760	,,	,,	how many years, months etc. ?

I.e.




Illustration

_9_2_7_6 8_x_5_1_	months 226736
20 months 26 days and 4 dandas or
1 yr. 8 months 26 days and 4 dandas being
the period of Budha-dasa at the time of birth.
No. JI.  If  the birth star of the boy would have

been 'Sw ti' nakshatra then  nakshatramiin of Swati nakshatra,
;1s bhukti and bhogyamiin ace to be calculated lint.  lludba
,dasa bhogya is to be found out according to the method shown above and after that the p riod of dssa indicated by Visakha nakshatra is to be added.
   Illustration : Say the boy was born on the 16th Baisakh, Wednesday at 10 A. M. (Calcutta local time). 10 hr. (L.M.T.)= 9 hr. 36 min. (J.S.T.). According to Susiddhanta Panjika:
Sunrise is at 5 hrs. 9 m. 24 Secs (J.S.T.)
Isthadanda is 11 danda 6 pala 30 bipala,
The day was ruled by s ·ati nakshatra, Nakshatramiin is 64
-danda 2 pala 13 bipala, bhogyamiin is 22 danda 49 pala 8 bipala. Budha-dasa under Swati Nakshatra is 4 yrs. 3 months= 51 months 64 danda 2 pala I3 hipala = 230533
22  ,.  49  .,  8  ,,    82148
Budha's dasa-period  under Swati Nakshatra ia 4 yrs. 3 m. or
51 months.

82148 xst
230533

add dasa period under

18 months 5 days 12 danda
=l yr. 6 m. 5 days 12 danda

Visakha Nakahatra 4  yrs. 3 m.
-s yrs. 9 m. 5 days 12 danda being the balance
of Budha-dasa at the time of birth.
We can find out dasa bhogya by Chandra-sphuta also.
   In caae of illustration No. I of the boy born on the 30th April 1953 Chandra-1phuta in that chart is 6s-27"-52'  This means

266	HINDU SCIENCE OF '.rHE FU'.rlJBE
Chandra in Tula rasi is 27°-52' and is associated with Visakha. Nakshatra which extends upto 3'-20' in Vrscika rasi.
   So, 7s-3°-20' minus 6s-27°-52'=5°-28' Visakha is yet to be­ consumed.  Span of each nakshatra is !3"-20'=800' min. or ka!a.
5"-28'=328 kala.  So, by rule of three,

328 X 51
800

20 months 27 days.
= l yr. 8 m. 27 days 18 danda.

   There is a difference of 2 months 22 days 18 danda between the period calculated by nakshatraman and bhogya, and Chandra­ sphuta which is possible.


Astottari Dasa-Antacdasa Table


yr.m,aavd.o400

"-Bud.ha0. 1110"-Sani1200"-Bani06200"-Vrhu.27200"-Vrhae.10200"-Ra.bu1800"-R•hu0800"-Sukra,21100"-Sukra1200"-Rwi01000




I



."
"-Bahn
-Sukm
-Ravi0
1
010
6
520	0
20 1.".
..-Sukra
-Ba.vi
-Chandra3
0
23
11
{20
10
lQ0
0
0•-Chandra11·10	0".-Mana;e.l138:10
ASTOTTARY DASA AND ANTARDASA	267


CHAPTER-XIII
Judgment of dan and antardasa according to
Uttarakalamrita

Dasa of Ravi :
   (1) If Ravi is strong and well-disposed the native shall be iilessed with a son, there will be increase of knowledge and lnte!lect, prosperity, pomp and power, gain of position, status and good luck etc.
   (ii) If Ravi is u favourable due to conjunction with or aspect by malefic or if he is an owner of an inauspicious house the following results during Ravi's dasa may be expected:
   Worries and anxieties, mental or physical agony, unsuccess, demotion in or dismissal from service, loSB of money, illness, displeasure of the king of the land, illness of father and other unfavourable results.
Dasa of Chandra :
   (i) When Chandra is benefic, strong and well-disposed the following results may he thought of, such as ;-affinity with and happiness of mother, digging a well or pond, acquisition of landed property, flower-gardening, blessings of brahmins, gain of wealth and happiness etc.
Dasa of Mangal :
   (i) If Mangal is strong and favourably posited following results are indicated, such as :-
Acquisition of land, fulfilment of desire, increase of know­
ledge and intellect, gain of power and status, birth of a brother etc.
(ii) If Mangal is unfavourable-illness of brother and sister,
creation of enemies due to misunderstanding and misbehaviour, quarrel, dispute relating to landed property, fear from fire and weapon, defective eye sight, displeasure ol the king of the land,
.accident etc.
Dasa of Budba :
   (i) When Budha is favourable and strong the following results may be expected such as-gain of wealth, knowledge,

JUDGMENT OF DABA AND ANTAllDABA	269
good education, honour, good relation with relatives, success upto expectation, building of house, good · name in service career etc.
(Ii)  If Budha is malefic and weak his dasa is not favourable,
Results of his dasa are as follows :-
   Living in a foreign land (now-a-days it is a boon to a person to have the opportunity of living in a foreign country. In ancient days it was a curse for him to live far away from hi& birth place), death of near and deer ones, misuse of intelligence. loss in business, inimical act of a business colleague, loss of money and landed property, worries and anxieties, miseries etc.
Das¦of Vrbaspatbi :
  (il If Vrhaspathi is strong and favourably disposed the results of his dasa will be as follows :-
   A leader of a village or city, may be first rate leader in the country, development of religious inclination, intellectual yearning, gain of wealth. name and fame, devotion to Brahmin and God etc.
(ii) If Vrhaspathi is weak and  unfavourable his dasa will
indicate the following :-to incur king's displeasure. mental agony, enmity of Brahmins, monetary stringency, dispute with father, disease of consumption or phthisis etc.
DasaofSulrnl:
   (i) When she is favourable and strong good luck, gain of high position and status, gain of wealth in kind or coin, an attempt to establish in a higher position among religious Panditl, an expert in many kinds of arts, to perform successfully a ceremonious festival, culture of music etc.
   (ii) If Sukra is unfavourable :-to be guided by wicked intellect, loss of money and property, to be addicted to carnal pleasure, to be a man of loose morals, to be addicted to wine and women, secret disease, to visit brothel etc.
Dasa of Sani :
   (i) If Sani is favourable and strong :-to dosacrificial rites. increase of happiness, to be prosperous, abundance of wealth. increase of wealth by skilful means in business, gain of leadership among common men etc.
   (ii) If Sani is unfavourable his dasa will prove notorioualy evil, 1uch as :-Ill health owing to attack of various sorts or

270	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE'
<liseases, liking for prohibited works, suffering from rheumatism or gout, loss of money, mental agony etc.
Dasa of Rahn :
   (il  When Rahu is favourable and strong-all round progress, to get an exaJted position in service, to attain spiritual knowledge, increase of power and authority etc.
   (ii) If Rahu is unfavourable-fear from snake and four-footed animal, weapon and fire, to be troubled by enemies, loss of money etc.
Dasa of Ket,u
   (iJ When ketu is favourable-gain of money through warks fraught with danger or beset with difficulties, increase of fortune with the help of a king of a foreign country, development of poetic faculties etc.
   (ii) If ketu is unfavourable-to be involved in danger, unsuccess in alJ endeavours, to be attacked with rheumatic disease, heartache, heart-throbbing, tremoring sensation throughout the whole body, disagreement with Brahmins, to foil down any work throueh mistake etc.
Special rules for dasas of Rahn and Keto :
   I. If Rahu or Ketu is posited in any Trikonasthana [5th or 9th house from lagna) and is associated wi,h or aspected by the lord of the 2nd ur 7th house their dasas may be considered as marakas (death-inflicting).
   2. On the other hand if any of those planets is situated in the 2nd or 7th house and aspected by or conjoined with 5th or 9th lord Rahu or Ketu may bestow long life and good wealth.
   But if the 2nd or the 9th lord is associated with any natural malefic death of the native during the dasa of Rahu or Ketu is possible.
   Some commentators are of opinion that if Rahu or Ketu occupying any of those trikona houses and the lord of that trikona house is conjoined with any natural malefic, in that case also death-inflicting.effect of the dasa of Ra!.u or Ketu is possible.
   3. If Rahu and Ketu are posited in a dual Rasi and also the lord of that dual sign or Rahu and Ketu are associated with a lord of kendra or kona then during dasa period of the lord of kcndra

JUDGMENT OF DABA AND ANTARDASA	1171
-0r kona the native may earn name and fame, gain much wealth, pomp and power.
   4. If these two planets (Rahu and Ketu) or lords of the houses where they are posittd are associated with the lord of kendra or kona and at the same time they are aspected by the lord of the uth, 8th or 12th house the native will not get any good result indicated above, on the other hand, death may overtake his mother or any one of her relatives.
   5. If these two planets are posited in chara (movable) or sthira (fixed) Rasi and are related to the lord of kendra or kona their dasa will produce good luck, but if they are pieced in any dusthana (6th, 8th or 12th house) or in a malefic house their dasa will not be productive of favourable results; but there are a few learned astrologers who are of opinion that under that circums• taace also the native shall get favourable results. Other commentators say that Rahu and Ketu being in unfavourable houses will endanger the life of the native, even if they are
.associated with a natural benefic.
   6. If these planets are seated in any dusthana (6th, 8th or 12th house) and are conjoined with or aspeoted by the lord of that dusthana their dasas are very very unfavourable.
   (i) Again if these planets be posited in any dusthana and are aspected by or cC"njoined with any maraka planet they may be treated as death inflicting.
   (ii) If they being in any dusthana are related to a lord of kendra or kona undoubtedly their dasas will be productive of some good results, but ultimately their dasas will prove very unfavourable for the native. He may be involved into accident, may be wounded by a weapon or may be drowned or he may commit suicide or may pass through miseraole days.
   7. If Rahu and Ketu being strong occupy a bhava and establish relation with that bhava-lord or if they are related to any other bhava lord they will produce the result of that planet with which they are connected. The intensity of such result depends on the strength or weakness of that planet with which they are connected. They will not be influenced by auy other plauet.

272	HIIIDll' SCl!INO!I OP THI! F'UTUBII
A few more instr11ctions about judgment  of dasa :-
   8. While explaining the results of dasa and bhukti of twc, planets Uttarakiiliimrita codifies a few rules. They are as follows :-(i) It is imperative for an astrologer to see the poaitions of the lords of dasa and antardasa from lagna.
   (Ii) Their strength must be ascertained (strength means sthana-bala, dik-bala, dristhi-bala) and relation between dasa and antardasa lords and also their relation with other planets must be looked into.
(iii) After judging all these things next thing is to see whether
dasa and antardasa lords are posited in kendra from each other. If so, the results of das:i &nd antardasa will be favourable provided they do not own any dusthana.
(iv) The bhava i.e. the house where dasa and antardasa-lord•
are situated should be taken as lagna. From that pos:tion the astrologer is to see the nature of results they will give. Further it is to be examined whether the planets are capable of imparting those results at all, this may be determined according to their atrength, association with or aspect by o:her planets. Moreover relation between dasa and antardasa-lords are also to be considered.
9. If dasa and antardasa lords do not own any dusthana or
are not situated in any unfavourable place from lagna their dasa. and antardasa give favourable result provided both of them are placed in kendra or kona position from each other.
   (i} If they are placed in the 2nd, 3rd or 1Ith place from each other their dasa and antardasa will be fairly good and if they are in the 6th and 81h places from each other no beneficial result. should be expected.
IO.  If  the  lord of antardasa is placed in the 6th, 8th or !Ztli
place from dasa-lord the former is to be considered as enemy to the latter.
   (i) If the antardasa-lord is posited in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 9th. 10th and 11th place from the dasa-lord the antardasa lord gives maximum good result.
(ii) If  the lord of dasa owns a malefic ho•Jse and does not
associate with a benefic antardasa-lord the result of their dasa
and antardasa is unfavourable.

JUDGMENT OP DASA AND ANTAllDASA	273
   (iU) If both of them are malefic and be.seated to1etber results of their dasa and antardasa arc unfavourable.
   (iv) The antardasa result will be unfavourable even if the lord of the antardasa is rajayogakaraka but not conjoined with any benefic dasa-lor.d.
(v) If the lord of major dasa is rajayogakaraka and at the
same time a 'maraka' the first part of his antardasa yields good result and the second part gives almost death-inflicting result.
   II. When dasa-lord is rajayogakaraka and antardasa-lord though malefic is favourable owing to position, aspect, association and in various other considerations he is strong and yogakaraka antardasa-results under that major dasa-lord in spite of bis death­ inflicting character should not be considered as endangering the life of the native.
   12. During the dasa and antardasa of Vrhaspathi and Sukra or vice veraa the native is expected to be prosperous, he may be engaged in religious ceremonies and gets wealth. He may be the leader of the country with pomp and power but the planets must own favourable houses and gain strength.
   (i) If those two planets are situated in the 6th and 8th places or 2nd and 12th places from each other and also combined with malefic and do not acquire positional strength the native may
·have dispute with his wife and children, there may be scandalous relation with women, fear from the head of administration, may be attacked with apoplexy ere.

Intenstlag results of the d1sa ud aatardasa of Sukra and Sani :
   l3, If both these planets being strong become yogakarakas, results of their dasa and antardasa are very unfavourable.
   (Here strength of the planets means, the planets may be in Vargottam navamsa, in their exalted house, swakshetra or ttlooltrikona-house)
   Under such conditions of planets the native will be as good as a beggar in their dasa and antardasa even though be is fabulously rich like Kuver.
   But of these dasa and antardasa-Jords if one is strong and another is weak the native will enjoy good results according to character and strength of the stronger planet.
14. If both of them  be weak and arc posited in the 6th, 8th
18

274	HINDU 801'.ENOE 011' THE li'OTORE
or 12th house or one of them is situated in the 6th or 8th place from another, or they own any of the dusthanas and be seated in those houses or be associated with the lord of dusthana the results of their dasa and antardasa will be exceptionally favourable.
15. · Dasa and antardasa of San! and Ravi :
   If these two planets qualify themselves as strong and fortified due to ownership of their own or exalted houses and at the same time occupy any kendra or kona, or they are owners of any kendra and kona the native is highly fortunate and is favoured by the king of the land (now-a-days kingship is abolished so it should be construed as Head of the State) the native earns sufficient money during the dasa and antardasa of Ravi and Sani or Sani and Ravi.
If both of them are  unfavourable their dasa and antardasa
will be maliciously evil.
16. Dasa and antardasa of Vrhaspathi and Mangal :
  Similarly if these two planets are strong and occupy any kendra or kona or they are owners of any kendra or kona and be yogakarakas and aspected by or combined with any favourable bhava-lord they confer on the native power, pomp and wealth and he passes his days happily with his wife and children, otherwise (i.e. if they are unfavourable) the results of their dasa and antardasa are very bad.
Dasa and antardasa flf Vrhaspathi and Badba :
   Here also the same rule is applicable, if they are strong and well-disposed and are placed in a kendra or kona from each other their dasa and antardasa will produce favourable result, The native may be successful in business enterprises, his academic career will be good, and his family life will be peaceful and he. shall pass his days happily.
   Similar will be results of dasas and antardasas of Sukra and Budha, Vrhaspathi and Ravi, and Vrhaspathi and Chandra,
Maharshl Pansara's instructions about judgment of
. Dasa and Antardasa
   I. Maharshi Parasara laid down a few rules to assume an antardasa-lord as benefic or malefic under certain conditions. These rules may be treated as hints in rendering proper and

JUDGMENT OF DASA AND ANTARDASA	275
accurate judgment of dasa and antardasa-results. But basic rules of determining favourable or unfavourable lord of a house according to lagna as noted down earlier must not be forgotten or misused;
Determination of favourable antardasa :
   I. If lagnapathi is posited in his own navamsa, dwadasamsa, or drekkan his antardasa is favourable.
2. When lagnapathi  is posited  in his own  or friendly
'trimsamsa', friendly navamsa or dwadasamsa, or he is situated in the navamsa or dwadasamsa of the 5th lord his antardasa ill favourable.
   3. The planet who is posited in the navamsa or dwadasamsa of the 4th or 9th lord produces favourable results in his antardasa.
   4. The lagnapathi when posited in the navamsa, dwadasamsa, or drekkan of the lord of the sign where he (lagnapathi) is situated will do good to the native in his antardasa.
   Similar favourable result is possible if lagnapathi is situated in the friendly navamsa, dwadasamsa or drekkan of the lord of the sign where lagnapathi is posited.
Unfavourable antardasa :
   I. The antardasas of the lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th houses are productive of evil results and miseries.
   2. If the lords of the 6th, 1st and marakasthanas ( 2nd & 7th places ) sit together in a house the antardasa of the 6th lord is very unfavourable.
   3. Even if the 6th lord and lagnapathi together be conjoined with Chandra in Sadavarga the native suffers from indigestion and other stomach-trouble in the antardasa of the 6th lord. Over and above he,has fear from water.
   4. If lagnapathi and the lord of the 6th house together are combined with Budha in Sadavarga the native suffers from rheumatism or gout, phlegmatic ailments and physical inertia during the antardasa of the 6th lord.
   5. If the aforesaid planets together are associated with Vrhaspathi in Sadavarga the native is attacked with many kinds of diseases during the antardasa of the 6th Iord.
6. If those two planets (viz., Jagnapathi and the lord of the

S7G     HINDU SOIENOE OF THE FUTURB
6th house) are combined with Sukra or Sani in Sedavarga the native falls ill due to excessive co-h bitation with women, during tbe antardasa of the 6th lord.
   7. Even if Sani is favourable in Sadavarga the native cannot escape this unfavourable result.
   S. If it is Mangal conjoined with lagnapathi and the lord of the 6th house in Sadavarga during the antardasa of the 5th lord tbe native is attacked with either rheumatism or typhoid
fever.
Laghu Parasari has  directed to look into 9 stages or avasthas.
o:' a planet before judging the dasa and antardasa.
These 9 stages are as follows :-
1. Wilen a planet is in the house of exaltation it is the stage of "dipta" (blazing).
2. Wilen a planet is in his own house it is the stage of ''swastba"· (healthy),
3. Whe'l a planet is in the most friendly house it is the stage of
"Pramudita" (cheerful).
4. When a planet is in a friendly house it is the stage of "Santa" ( peaceful).
5. When a plan t is in the neutral house it is the sta-ge of "dina"
(distressed).
When a planet is in an enemy house it is the stage of "sti­ dookshita" (very afflicted).
7. Wben a planet is conjoined  with a malefic it is the stage of
"bikala" (physically handicapped).
:l. When a planet is situated in the house of a malefic it is the stage of khala (wicked).
9. When a planet is associated with sun or eclipsed by sun's rays.
it is the stage of kupita (angry).
Results of dasa and antardasas of planets of different stages :
   1. During the dasa and antardasa of a 'dipta' planet the n1tive becomes very active and energetic, there is increase of w olth, courage and power, popsession of conveyance, gain of' f, 'er.ds, intlt.once, name and fame and authority etc.
2. During the dasa and antardasa of "swastha" planet results­
are almost the same as before but intensity of good effect is slightly less than the 'dipta' planet's dasa and antardasa.
.l.  During the dasa and antardasa of a 'pramudita' planet

JUDGMBN'I" -OF DASA AND ANTARDASA	277

.-esults are as follows :-gain of money. land. pcrfu,91es, clothes and  ornament• etc.  The native becomes sober and  he takes
-delight in listening and reading the puranas.
   4. During the da•a and antardasa of a 'santa' planet the native acquires knowledge from religious scriptures and becomes highly educated and learned, he gets royal reception and wealth and happiness.
   The first four stages of planets noted above are favourable, Of these four stages result of dasa-antardasa of 'Pramudita' planet is more favourable than 'santa' planet's dasa-antardasa.
   Results of 'swastha" planets' d sa-antardasa is more fa·vourable than Pramudita and 'dipta' planet's dasa•antardasa is more favourable than 'swastha' planet's dasa-antardasa.
   5. During the dasa and antardasa of a 'dina' planet-dislodge­ ment from residence or place of occupation, dispute with and separation from friend, bodily affliction due to prolonged illness.
   6. Dasa and antardasa of 'ati-dookshita' planet-suffering from too much miseries. fear from king and thief, friendlessness, sojourn to a foreign land,
   7. Dasa and antardasa of 'bikala' planet-physical inertia, bad health, loss of friends, conveyance and clothings, bad time
-0f native'• wife and children, fear from thief etc.
   8. Dasa and antardasa of a 'khala' planet-quarrel. death of a friend and a superior person, loss of mental peace due to activities of enemies, loss of wealth and land. to be defamed by the native's own men.
   9. Dasa and antardasa of 'kupita' planet-to be engaged in sinful acts, bad results regarding education and money. bad time for wife and children, loss of friends.
Here also results of'dookshita' planet is worse than 'dina' planet·
,,,,bikala,,".,.,, 'dookshita' pla_net,,nkhala,,,,,,,, 'bikala' planet,,kupita,.,..,,, 'bikala' planetResults or Mahadasa and Antardasa
( According to Sarvartha Chintamoni )
   General Rules : When planets are in their exalted house. attain exalted navamsa, or posited in their own house results of their Mahadasa vi.r-a-vis dasa and antardasa are f11vourable.

278	HINDU SUENOB 01" THE F'IJTORE

   Ravi's mahadasa-When Ravi is in 10 degree in Mesa rasi he i• in his highest exalted point.  In his mahadasa the native may get Government service, he may be favoured and honoured by Government. There is possibility of increase of wealth and cattle.
   There are possibilities of unf,.vourable results too, such as dispute and quarrel with kith aod kin, being disgusted the native may leave his houseland, moral degradation and enmity with others.
   When Ravi is 'Arohi' ( 'Arohi' means ascending )-Ravi's maximum debilitated point is 10 degree in Tula rasi. When he goes beyond 10 degree he is 'Arohi', 'Arohi' (ascending) Ravi in his dasa will give the native name and fame, luck will favour him, besides he will earn money in exchange of agricul­ tural products. Though technically an ascending planet Ravi is said to he able to confer these good results. In practical instance planets when ascending can not impart favourable results in all cases unless they are otherwise strong. The first part of the dasa of an ascending planet can not give favourable results but the second part is much better than the first part.
   When Ravi is debilitated-The native shall incur displeasure· of the king (head of the state) and he sustains loss of money and prestige. Other results are-bereavement, miseries, worries, loss of superior persons or wife and children, dislodgement from home-stead, dispute with others.
Ravi will give similar results if he is debilitated in navamsa
·chart. Even if exalted Ravi in the natal chart be posited in the house of debilitation in the navamsa chart he gives unfavourable· results in the second part of the dasa.
Ravi's antardasa under Ravi's mabadasa-If Ra vi is strong
during his antardasa the native shall get royal favour, he will succeed iil all his endeavours. If Ravi is weak the results will be unfavourable such as :-The native shall wander through wild and hilly countries, he shall have disappointing results in all enterprises and lose name and fame.
Chandra's antardasa under Ravi'1 dasa-When Chandra ha•
her antardasa during the progress of Ravi's mahadasa the native shall earn money through agricultural pursuits, he will vanquish his enemies, overcome his miseries, and get more friends.

JlTDGMENT OF DASA AND ANTARDASA	279
   The native will get those favourable results under the following conditions :
(a)  Chandra  is positionally strong, (b) She is waxing, (c) is
posited in a benefic rasi, and (d) aspected by or conjoined with a benefic. If it is otherwise-that is, if Chandra is weak positionally, either in birth or navamsa chart, aspected by or associated with a malefic the results of her antardasa will be unfavourable. The native may be attacked with cough and cold, consumption, indigestion, disease arisi'lg from water, he shall lose mental peace and suffer from miseries.
According to P¦rasari  Hora-If Chandra  is situated in
dusthana the native shall suffer from mental agony, possibility of dislodgement from his permanent house, dispute and quarrel with relatives, be may suffer from pai.1ful mi turition and he may have fear from king a.nd thief.
   If benefic Chandra is situated in the 9th, 11th or in any kendra during Chandra's antardasa (or bhukti) the native shall enjoy his days happily, shall make new friends, shall get money, position and status. He shall be blessed with children, grand children etc. If Chandra is the lord of the 2nd or 7th place from lagna and is posited in any dusthana during Chandra's antardasa death of the native may be possible.
   Mangal's antardasa under Ravi's Mahadasa-First and fore­ most thing is to look after is whether Mangal is strong, yoga­ karaka and  posited in kendra or kona from Ravi, and he is not posited in any dusthana from lagoa. Then Mangat will produce very good results, such as,-the native shall squire	landed property, may b11ild a house of his own, be shall be appreciated by .all for his valour, and energetic and manly performances.  As a yogakaraka Mangal in his antardasa may help the native attain a very high position, earn good money and name and fame. Such a strong and yogakaraka Mangal may D1ake the native a leader of the country during his antardasa.
   If Mangat is weak, posited in a dusthaoa, aspected by or in any other way related with a malefic the native may suffer from wounds and various diseases, such as-dysentery, piles, or ail­ ments. effected by poisonous drugs. He may have to court imprisonment, may have quarrel with his brother or·sister and may lose his service.

280	BIKDU SCIENCE OP TIIE PUTURB
  Rahu's antardasa nnder Ravi's Mahadasa-Rahu's antardasa will be favourable under the following conditions:-
   (i) If be is well-disposed in the natal chart and also posited in favourabl navamsa, and associated with a favourable planet, (Ii) if he occupies any upacbayasthaoa (3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th houses) or being in any kendra be is associated with lord of the 5th or 9th houses, or being in a kona he is associated with lord of any kendra.
   Under these circumstances if Rahu is not situated in 6th, 8th or 12th place.from Ravi the native, during the antardasa ofRahu shall get opportunity to prosper brilliantly, he shall get royal favour, shall be appreciated by all for his glorious deeds. The antardasa of a favourable Rahu will bring fortune to the native and his house will look bright due to performances of ceremonious festivals.
   Rahn when weak-If Ra 1u is woak or posited in any dusthana from Ravi, following unf,.vourable results are possible, such as creation of new enemies on account of misdeeds of the native, loss of money and accumulated wealth, the native may have to face various troubles, there may be danger from poison and snake, fear from thief, possibility of destruction of domestic cattle, house and land. The native shall have strong desire to appease sensual pleasure. He may be a1tacked with strong diarrhoea, may  suffer from chronic disease due to enlargement of spleen, abdominal tumour or consumption etc.
   If weak Rahu is posited in the 2nd or 7th place ftom lagna or he is combined with the lord of the 1nd or 7th place -there is danger of accidental death or •nake-bite.
Vrhaspathl's antardasa under Ravi's Mahadasa-Vrhaspathi
is the only plan ! out of 9, who can do immense good to the native if be is well-disposed, strong, and posited in kelldra or kona from the lord of Mahadasa.
   When is Vrhaspathi strong ? He is considered as strong when he occupies his own house, house of exaltation, mooltrikona house or is posited in exalted or friendly navamsa, or aspected by or conjpined with a friendly planet. If strong Vrhaspathiis situated in kendra or kona from lagna or Ravi or from both, the results of Vrhaspathi's antardasa under the major period of Ravi will be favourable. The native shall earn good· money, ,shall

JUDGMENT OF DAIA AND ANTARDASA.	281
'take pleasure to worship gods and adore brahmins. He shall attaill success in all works with the help of-the state. During the progress of Vrhaspathi's antardasa there is possibility of marriage and birth of a son.
If Vrhaspathi owns the 9th or 10th house the native shall
attain a very high position and shall make friends with men of high social standing.  He shall be very lucky and shall get
-respect and honour from all. He may visit holy shrines and shall be in the company of pious and religious-minded men.
Weak Vrhaspathi when posited in the 6th, 8th and 12th place
from Ravi-His antardasa will be very unfavourable, such as:­ the native may fa\! very badly ill, may be attacked with indigestion, stomach-ache, consumptive disease, disease in ears; his children may fall ill, he may be a victim of wrath of the head of the state, may sustain loss of wealth due to sinful acts.
   Sani's	antardasa	under	Ravi's	Mabadasa-Readers are requested first to go through the results contemplated by the author "f Uttarakalamrita, such as, the native may fall badly ill, may be attacked with stomach-ache, indigestion, consumptive disease, disease of the ear, native's children too may fall ill, he may be a victim of wrath of the bead of the state, loss of wealth due to sinful acts etc. In Phaladipika the author mentioned only malefic results to be enjoyed by the native but in Parasari Hora the results are as follows :-
   If Sani is in kendra or kona position, there is possibility of destruction of enemies and gain of little money. The native, according to that book shall enjoy his days very happily. If Saoi is situated in the house of exaltation, friendly house or his own house or accompanied by a friend, there is possibility of marriage-ceremony in his house, he gets royal favour and earns name and fame. The author further says that if Saoi is weak and is posited in any dusthana the native shall sustain Joss of money, may be bard bit due to excessive expenditure, may Jose his belongings, h may be attacked with various diseases, such as, diarrhoea, rheumatism, colic pain, and phlegmatic ailments. There is possibility of sudden quarrel with bis own kinsmen or any other person, even the native may have to court imprisonment.
Uttarakalamrita endorses the view of Mabarsbi Parasara but

282	BINDU SOIENOB OF THB FUTORE

has not stated the results in detail. The author only said that the· native shall be favoured by the king (i.e. Head of the State) and he shall be lucky if Sani and Ra vi are situated in their exalted houses or own houses etc. (Even if !he planets are well-placed in navamsa chakra beneficial result will be possible). But if these two planets are weak and are placed in an unfavourable house the native will enjoy very unfavourable result.
Dasa  and  antardasa  of  Vrhaspathi  and  Mangal-W hen
Vrhaspathi and Mangat acquire strength and be placed in kendra and kona, or they may own any kendra or kona house and related to each other and be yogakarakas, or rhey being lo.rds of favour­ able houses are conjoined with or aspected by benefics during their dasa and antardasa the native may be endowed with very many favourable results, such as, earning much wealth, excer... cising authority over many, be dignified etc. He is happy with his wife and children. If the planets are ill-disposed, weak and have other faults the results will be the reverse.
   Dasa and antardasa of Vrhaspathi and Budba : In case of these two planets if they are strong, well-disposed, be placed in kendra or kona, or qualify themselves as favourable the native gets good education, learned friends, prosperity in business and; be happy. Otherwise results will be very unfavourable.

CHAPTER XIV
RAJAYOGAS
   Raja means king, yoga means relation by combination, aspect,. exchange of houses etc. So, Rajayoga should literarily signify a yoga that	makes a person	king.	But	truly	speaking the word Rajayoga does not carry any such meaning. It is needless to mention here that the term denotes a very beneficial relation between one planet with another or relation between lords of different bhavas that may confer fortune, money, prestige, social status, pomp and power.
   In Parasari Hora there are four kinds of Rajayogas. They are described as hereunder :--
Rajayoga is produced-
   !.	When lord of a kendra is related to the lord of a kona (We already know that there are four kendras and three konas,. viz., lagna,the 4th, the 7th and the 10th houses or bhavas are four kendras. Again lagna, the 5th and the 9th houses are konas). Lagoa is both a kendra and a kona.
   Formation	of this auspicious	yoga is subject to a few conditions which will be explained one by one.
   Relation between lords of kendra and kona will be very effective when
   (a) The two planets exchange their houses. This is the major Rajayoga. Please note that excepting Ravi and Chandra each planet owns two houses. Say, Lagna is in Mithune, the 4th lord (who himself is Lagnadhipathi) is in Tula, the 5th house and the lord of the 5th house Sukra occupie• the 4th. So, there is an exchange of houses between lord of the 4th house (a kendra)· and the lord of the 5th (a kona).	Now Budha owns Mithuna. and Kanya, and Sukra, the lord of Tula and Vrsa. If Budha is in Vrsa and Sukra is in Mithuna, the Rajayoga is not produced as it is an exchange of houses between Lagna-lord and the lord of the 12th house which is neither a kendra nor a kona.
   (b) If one yogakaraka planet is seated in the house owned by another yogakaraka planet and the latter is aspected by the former and there is no aspect of the latter planet on the former

284	HINDU SC!ElWE OF THE FUTURE
Rajayoga is produced. As for instance, Mangat is posited in Kumbha the house of Sani being in Kanya, here Mangal occupy­ ing Sani's house aspects Sani who has no aspect on Mangal.
Of these two planets on must be the lord of a kendra the other the lord of a kona.
   (c) It will be a Rajayoga when there is mutual aspect between kendr,pethi and konapathi.
   (d) When kendrapathi and konapathi are associated with one another it will also he a Rajayoga. Further, when these two are posited in one varga Rajayoga will he the result.
   Any of these four kinds of Rajayogas may do good to the native during the dasa and antardasa of yogakaraka planets.
When Rajayoga is censidered defunct ?
   I. If a natural benefic is t!Je lord of a kendrasthana (i.e. 4th, 7th, 10th & the 1st) that benefic planet becomes a papa (malefic). When a natural malefic is the lord of any kendra he is considered as a favourable planet.
   Vrhaspathi, Sukra, waxing Moon and Budha when are not associated with any malefic are naturally beneficial planets.  If
these planets are lords of any kendra they are taken to be as malefics.
   2. Sani, Ravi, Mangal, waning Moon and papa Budha (when he is associated with any malefic) are natural malefics. They are considered as favourable due to ownership of any kendra.
   3. Lords of the 3rd, 6th and 11th are also piipa (malefic) planets. Of these three lords, the 11th lord is the most powerful malefic and the 6th lord is more powerful than the 3rd.
   4. The lords of the 2nd and the 12th have peculiar role to play. They give the effect of those lords of bhavas with whom they are related by way of combination with or aspect by anyone of the four rajayoga-karakas referred to above. Their independent function is not acknowledged by learned astrologers. They are so to say neutral planets neither favourable nor unfavourable. Each planet excepting Ravi and Chandra owns two houses. Of these two houses one may be any one of the 2nd and the 11th and other may be a kendra or kona. If these lords are not related to any other planet, the result good or bad may be determined according to their position. If they are in malefic houses (such as 6th, 8th or 12th pla e) their result will be unfavourable, again if they are in beneficial houses good will be the result.

RAJAJOGAS	285
   Strength of favourable or unfavourable results of the 2nd and the 12th lords may be juc!ged through those planets with whom the former planets are attached by combination, aspect or by any other relationship. In case of Ravi and Chandra effective­ ness of good or bad result may be judged from their relation with
other bhava-lords.
  s. When a planet owns a kendra and alsc, any one of the 3rd,
6th and 11th houses his relation witb. the lord of the konapathi will nc,: produce any Rajayoga.	Vrhaspathi and Snkra being naturally most auspicious planets ace the strongest malefics due to their ownership of any kendra. Of these two planets Vrhaspathi is more malefic than Sukra who is more unfavourable than beneficial Budha and Budha is more unfavourable than Chandra. Therefore Vrhaspathi and Sukra have priority over all other marakas when they are lords of the 2nd or 7th houses or both.
This is the reason why .for the native of Mesa lagna Sukra is said to be the strongest maraka.
   If a planet is the lord of lagna and the 8th house he will not be considered as a papa because of his lordship cf lagna. Mangat of Mesa lagna-nativc therefore is not a papa and so also the case with Sukra of Tula lagna-native.
   For all practical purposes Sukra of Tula lagna is not taken to be a favourable planet by learn d astrologers.
   6. The lord of the 5th and 9th houses are favourable but Sukra of Kanya lagna and Vrbaspathi of Vrschika lagna de, not give auspicious result during their dasa and antardasa due to their lordship of the 2nd house which is a marakasthan. This is explained elaborately later on. This is also to be noted that none of the standard books on Astrology has mentioned anything like that. But this is our practical experience, and we dare claim that their unfortunate result in many horoscopes was a reality.
   7. If the 9th and 10th lords become inauspicious due to their ownership of any dusthana 3rd, 6th, I.th, 11th, or 12th houses they will be giving favourable result when they exchange their houses, in other words, if the 9th lord occupies the 10th house and the 10th lord is in the 9th.
   8. When lagnapathi and dhanapathi (lord of the dhana-2nd house) are related to each other by one of the 4 kinds of relationship it is a wealth-giving yoga.

286	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE

(i) Relationship  between  4th  and  5th  lords--it makes a
person a minister or an advisor to any institution.
  (ii) Relationship between 2nd and 3rd lords-It makes a person a Government officer.
   (iii) Relationship between 5th and 6th lords-The person will be engaged in dangerous activities. The birth Chart of 0Shivajin may be consulted.
   (iv) Relationship between 10th and I Ith lords-The person having such a yoga may acquire land, money etc.
(v) Relationship between Atmakaraka planet and lagna-lt is
one of the best •·Rajayogas" when positioned in one rasi, that makes a man very fortunate.
   (vi) Relationship between 5th lord & Putrakaraka-lt may make a man intelligent and wealthy. (.Maharsi Parasara did not mention the nature of the result ).
   (vii) When atmakaraka lagna is situated in a kendra from tagna, or atmakaraka planet is situated in any kendra or kona from lagna or from Chandra or the lord of the rasi where Chandra is posited-all these yogas make a man prosperous, popular and wealthy.
9. Maharaja yoga :-
   When the lord of lagna or the 7th place occupying lagna, or the 7th house is related to atmakaraka and putrakaraka planet or the latter is aspected by either lagna lord or the lord of the7tll house and the atmakaraka and putrakaraka are aspected by the lord of the 5th house, the native enjoys power, pomp and respect from many.
JO.  If  lagna and atmakaraka planet are situated in the 5th
or 7th place from the 9th lord it is a Rajayoga that makes a mhn prosperous ; he owns many kinds of conveyances and becomes a wealthy person.
11. If the 2nd, 4th and 5th  places from atmakaraka  planet
.are occupied by benefics and 3rd and 6th places by malefics the native flourishes in his career, he gets pomp and power in abundance.
If those places are- occupied  by  both benefic and  malefic
planets the result may not be excellent but his career may be better than average men.
12. If Sukra is placed in the 5th place from either atmakaraka

RAJAJOGAS	287

planet, Arudha-lagnapada or Jata-lagna and she is conjoined with or aspected by Vrhaspathi or Chandra the native is born
-0f a royal family or he is intimately related to the king of the land.
13. It is one of the best Rajayogas when Ravi and other
planets have aspect on Janma lagna, Hora lagna and Ghati lagna. If those three lagnas are aspected by one planet the native becomes prosperous just like a king.
[ The process of finding out gbati lagna :-The jatadanda and
pala is to be divided by 12. The remainder danda and pala are to be converted into Rasi and amsa. Each danda is equal to one rasi,
,every two palas are equal to t amsa, and two bipalas are equal
to 1 kala. The newly found rasi, amsa and kala are to be added to true lagnasphuta. The result will be ghati lagna. There will be no change of the positions of planets of the jata-chakra. ]
   14. If an exalted planet casts his aspect over janma lagna, Hora lagna and gha ti-lagna or that planet aspects any one of these three lagn,r.< the native becomes the head of the society and
.a top-man in the institution he serves.
If the planet instead of  being in his house of exaltation
-Occupies his own house or own navamsa and aspects on any two lagnas of the aforesaid three lagnas the uative becomes one of the top men of the society or of the institution he serves.
   15. If arudha-lagna being associated with Chandra is placed in beneficial house and the 2nd place from arudha-lagna is
-Occupied by Vrhaspathi or arudba-lagna when placed in a beneficial house is associated with or aspected by an exalted planet it signifies a great Rajayoga.
   Even if Chandra alone is associated with arudha-lagna the native earns name and fame.
   16. If the lagna, 2nd and 4th places from lagna are occupied by bencfic planets and malefic planet or planets are situated in the 3rd place from lagna the native becomes a king or a prosperous man like a king,
17. The planet even if he is debilitated  becomes significator
-0f Rajayoga if he aspects the lagna.
   18. If natural beneficial planet• own 6th and 8th places and are not combined with any other planet and aspect lagna they are significt.toro of Rajayoga.

988	HINDU SO!ENOE OP '.!:HE l'IJ'TUBE
   ( The rules 17 and 18 are contradictory to each other. Rule no. 17 says that any planet even if he is posited in the house of debilitation or owns a dusthana will be a yogakaraka. Rule no- 18 says when natural benefics owning 6th and 8th place, aspect the lagna they will be yogakaraka if they are not associated with any other planets. Experience will be proper guide in this matter. I am of the opinion that a ber..efic planet even if he owna a dusthana will give favourable result if that planet aspects lagna; butin case of a malefic planet he (the planet) aspecting the lagna does not give favourable result if be owns any one of the 6th, 8th and 12th places. ]
   1.9. A planet or planets become "Raja-yogakaraka" under the following conditions :-
(i) If the 5th place from Chara lagna is aspected by a planet.
   (Ii)  If the 9th place from Sthira lagna is aspected by a planet.
(iii) If the 10th place from Dwatyaka lagna is aspected by a
planet.
The aspecting planet or planets are Raja-yogakarakas.
   (Some astrologers arc of opinion, in case of Dwatyaka lagna planet• aspecting any kendra (4th, 7th, 10th and ht) will bc­ Rajayoge.karakas.)
   20. If a powerful planet occupies the 4th place from lagna he will be a Rajayogakaraka, but if that 4th house falls in dwatyaka rasi the very best Raja yoga result is expected, if the 4th house falls in sthira rasi the result will be better and in case of 4th place being a chara rasi the result will be good.
  This means Sthira rasi is better than Chara rasi and Dwatyaka rasi is b tter than sthira rasi.
   21. If a planet occupying 4th or 11th place aspects lagna or dhana bbava-2nd place from lagna-the native will possess conveyances and becomes happy.
   Only this yoga will make him a moneyed man if his birtb­ chirt does not contain any other Rajayoga.
   This yoga will be highly effective in case of Karkata, Dhanu. and Mina lagnas.
In case of Karkata lagna if Sani occupies Tula rasi [4th place
from lagna) or Vrsa rasi [11th place from lagna) aspect of San upon Iagna is possible, hence, Sani is yogakaraka.  Mangat in.

RAJAJOGAS	289

Vrsa rasi also will be a yogakaraka as his aspect falls on the 2nd place from the 11th house.
   In case of Dbanu lagna also Sani will be Rajayogakaraka if he is posited in the 4th or II th house. Mangal also will be yoga­ karaka being in the I Ith house from Dhanu lagna.
   In case of Mina lagna both Sani and Mangal will be Raja­ yogakaraka.
   22. Sukha (happiness) yoga :-The native will enjoy material happiness if the 4th lord from lagna or atmakaraka lagna casts his aspect on Jata lagna or atmakaraka planet.
   23. If atmakaraka and amatyakaraka planets are combined with or aspected by _the 10th lord or the 10th lord is aspected by amatyakaraka planet the native will become a highly placed officer under Govt. of the land.
   24_ If the atmakaraka planet being conjoined with or aspccted by the 9th lord is situated in kendra or kona I'lace·from lagna the native becomes a minister.
   25. If the rasi-patbi (the lord of the rasi where Chandra is situated in the natal chart) becomes the atmakaraka, being conjoined with a benefic he is posited in lagna the native becomes a minister in old age.
   26. The native becomes an illustrious personality and all his endeavours will be successful if atmakaraka planet or Jata-lagna is placed in the 7th or 9th place from the 5th lord.
   27. If the bbagyarudbapada (9th pada or bhagyapada) falls in Jata-lagna and the 9th pada (bhagyarudhapada) is in the 9th place from the sign where atmakaraka planet is posited or from the lord of the sign (rasi) where 9th pada is situated configuration of Planets as such will give favourable effect of Rajayoga in dasa and antardasa of that yogakaraka planet or during the dasa and antardasa of other rajayogakaraka or favourable planets.
   28. If the lord of the 11th house from lagna unaspected by any malefic is situated in the 11th house and atmakaraka planet is conjoined with a benefic the native acquires wealth through the grace of the king of the land.
   29. If Chandra and Sukra jointly are situated in the 4th place from atmakaraka planet the native upto the last day of his life enjoys happiness, wealth, honour and prestige. He is highly placed in society he live11 in and is held in high-esteem by others.·
19

290	HINDU SOlENCE OF THE l'UTUBB
Only this yoga is sufficient to make him happy.
   30. If atmakaraka planet being in his mooltrikona· house is associated with the 5th lord from lagna the native acquires name and fame.
31. If the 9t'h lord being asp·ected by or conjoined with
atmakaraka planet is placed in the 9th or 11th house and 5th lord is posited in the th place the native acquires as much wealth as he likes.
One condition in this yoga must be fulfilled.  It is that, both
5th and 9t'1 lords must be either in conjunction with or aapected by tbe qtmakaraka planet.
   Some of the commentators are of opinion that of the two lords of the 5th and 9th houses if one is in conjunction with and the other is aspected by the atmakaraka planet this yoga will be fruitful.
32. The famous author, the great Baraha Mihir illustrated a
few yogas in his Brihat-Jataka. Those who have any one of such yogas become kings or as prosperous as a king. The yogas are as follows:-
(i) If Sani and Chandra are posited  in  their  Douses  of
exaltation, lagna rises in any one of Tula and Vrsa rasi, Ravi and Bud ha are in the 6th place from lagna, and Sukra, Mangat and Vrhaspathi are seated in Tula, Mesa and Karkata rasis respec,ively the native becomes a king or a prosperous man like a king.
There is an astronomical error in this yoga.  For, if lagna
rises in Vrsa the yoga is quite all right, but in case ofTula-lagna when Ravi and Budha are posited in the 6th place i.e. in Mina Rasi Sukra cannot be placed in Tula.
   So, astrological savants are of opinion that in the Zodiacal chart the 6th house was meant by the author to be Kanya rasi (not 6th house from lagna of the birth chart) which is the sixth place from the first rasi Mesa.
(ii) If lagna rises in  Makar rasi where there are Sani and
Mang•!, and Ravi and Cb.andra are situated in the 12th place from lagna the native becomes a king.
   (iii) Simila tly, when Chandra and Mangal are in Makar­ lagna and Ravi in the 12th place from lagna the same result may be prophesied.

RA1AJOGAS	291
   (iv) If Ravi, Chaudra and Mangal are situated in Mesa lagna and Vrbaspathi is in Dhanu Rasi or Siini and Chandra are posited in the 7th place from Mesa lagna and Vrhaspathi in Dbnnu raai the native becomes a king,
   (v) In case of Vrsa-lagna if Chandra occupies lagna, Ravi in the 4th place, Vrhaspathi in the 7th place and Sani is situated in the 10th house from lagna the native is sure to become a king.
   (vi) In case of Kanya lagna if Budha and Sukra are placed in lagna, Vrhaspathi and Chandra occupy Dhanu rasi and 5th house is occupied by Sani and Mangal the native becomes a king.
   (vii) If lagna is occupied by Budha and Sukra, Mangal and Vrhaspathi are situated in Makar rasi and Chandra is in Dhanu rasi the native becomes a king. This is really a very favourable yoga if lagna rises in any rasi of the Zodiac and planets arc placed in different houses as directed by the great author; but of all lagnas in case of Mina lagna configuration of planets as stated above will signify the best rajayoga.
   (viii) If Chandra is associated with Mina lagna, Sani in Kumbha rasi, Mangal in Makar and Ravi in Sinha rasi the native becomes a very powerful king and at the same time he is a man of strong moral character.
   (ix) In case of Mesa lagna if Mangat is seated in lagna and Vrhaspathi is in Karkata rasi or if lagna rises in Karkata with Vrhaspathi in lagna and Mangal is posited in Mesa rasi the native becomes a king of strong moral character and commands great power.
   This is to be noted that in both the lagnas the lord of the 9th house is powerful. In case of Karkata lagna both the lords of luck and tenth houses are powerful. Ninth house signifies moral character, virtue etc. So, when the 9th lord is powerfully posited in a favourable place from Iagna and lagna is not afflicted the native is expected to be possessing strict moral sense. Hence, the yoga is stated to be a sign of strong moral character.
   (x) In case of Karkata lagna ifVrhaspatbi is posited in lagna, Chandra, Budha and Sukra in the 11th house and Ravi is situated in Mesa rasi the native becomes a very powerful king.
   Commentators are of opinion that whatever may be th positions of other planets this yog, shall never fail.

292	HINDU SCll!NCE OF THE FUTURE
   (xi) If powerful Bud ha is sicuated in lagna, natural benefics. (Vrhaspathi and Sukra) are in the 9th house and remaining. planets are posited in upachayasthana (3rd, 6th, 10th and Jlth house) the native born in a royal family becomes a benevolent 01d pious king.
   Here also, Sukra is to be omitted in this yoga, as he c?.nno• be rtaced in the 9th house if Budha is situated in lagna. Herc natural benefics may mean Vrhaspatbi and waxing moon and other remaining planets are to be placed in upachayastlanas and Sukra may be posited in the 3rd house which is also a t.pachayasthana.
   Some commentators are of opinion that if natural benefics occupy the 4th house instead of the 9th the yoga will also be fruitful.  If the native is not born in a royal family  he may not be a king but he will be a benevolent, wealthy and powerful man.
   (xii) In Vrsa lagna if Chandra is in lagna, Vrhaspathi in the 2nd, Sani in the 6th and the remaining planets are posited in the I Ith house the native becomes a king.
   (xiii) If +th house from lagna is occupied by Vrhaspathi, 10th house by Ravi and Chandra, Sani is in lagna and other planets. ore posited in the I1th place from lagna the native becomes a king.
One very important thing in this yoga is to be noted that
,, hatever may be the lagna rasi there will be "Jecva yoga" or "Gajakesari yoga" and wealth-giving planets in case of almost all lagnas will either be yogakarakas or they will be situated in the 11th place from lagna.
When the yogas stated above will be fruitful ?
   The author of Brihat-Jataka pointed out that when the yoga­ karaka planet or planets are powerfully posited in lagna or the 10th house the native will enjoy rajayoga result during the dasa­
,-ntardasa of those planets.
   Ill case the lagna or the 10th house remains unoccupied by ny planet the strongest among rajayogakaraka plane!• may give beneficial result during their favourable transit.
   (xiv) If lagna rises in the houses owned by Budha, Vrhaspathi or Sukra and any one of these planets are situated in lagna, San•

RAJAJOGAS	293
in the 7th house and Ravi occupies the 10th place from lagna the native enjoys happiness all through his life.
   33. (i) When all the planets being in the cardinal (movable} signs are situated in kendra-position from lagna the native becomes a wealthy man but he will be a dishonest person and reside in a foreign land.  The yoga is termed as Rajju yoga.
   (ii) When all the planets being in fixed signs are situated in kendra positions from lagna the native shall be a very rich man with a strong sense of self-respect.
The yoga is termed as Musul yoga.
(iii) Similarly in case of  the  planets being in dual sign
{Dwatyaka rasi) and in the kendra positions from lagna the native may be physically crippled but he will be intelligent, tactful and wealthy.
   34, If benefic and malefic planets are placed in all the four kendras the yoga is termed as Kamal yoga. If any kendra is occupied by only malefic the yoga will not be disturbed.
   He who has Kamal yoga in his birth-chart becomes illustrious, talented, famous and happy.
Sri Rama Chandra had Kamal yoga in his chart.
   35. When all the "planets arc posited in Panafar (2nd, 5th, '8th and 11th places) or Apoklima houses (3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th houses) the native keeps good health all through his life, he knows the tact of accumulating money and becomes a miser.
    36. If from the beginning of lagna upto 7th place eacjl house is occupied by planets the native becomes a famous man no doubt tbut he is miserly and enjoys unsteady fortune. The yoga is called
·,.•Nou yoga".
When a native has sense of decency or aestheticism ?
   37. (i)	When Chandra is posited in apoklima place (3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th houses) from Ravi, it is named as "Baristha yoga".
   (ii) When Chandra is situated in Panafar (2nd, 5th, 8th and I Ith places).
(iii) When Chandra is in kendra from Ravj.
   Of these three yogas-the I st  one is the best, the 2nd one is the next best and the 3rd one is the weakest. Besides the native's sense of decency the  yoga makes a man great in many spheres of life. Sec birth charts of Einstein, Rajendra

294	HINDU BOIENOE OF THE FUTURE
Prasad, Jagadish Chandra	Bose,	Rabindra	Nath	Tagore Balgangadhar T.ilak etc.
   All these great men's horoscope, contain this Baristha yoga. In this connection, Uttarakalamrita a notable hook on astrology
•aid to have been written by Mahakavi Kalidasa has given a Hry sure anJ certain clue for testing the effectiveness of Baristha yoga. According to this book if Chandra is posited in his own,. friendly or exalted navamsa and conjoined with or aspected by either Sukra or Vrhaspathi the yoga will be very brilliantly effective.
   Of course, Uttarakalamrita said separately in rajayoga chapter that if Chandra is situated in his own, friendly or exalted. narnmsa and at the same time conjoined with or aspected by Vrhaspathi or Sukra the native becomes omntsctent, highly meritorious and benevolent. He is also a man of strong. personality.
   38. Adhi Yoga :-If Budba, Vrhaspathi and Sukra-these­ three benefics are situated in the 6th, 7th and 8th places from ChHndra it is termed as Adhi yoga. This is a highly efficacious. yog;i which gives a man good health, high education, wealth,. position. status and happiness. According to Jataka Parijat it ill­ named as Chandradhi yoga.
   The benefic planets may sit together h only one of those­ houses or they may occupy separately all those three houses.
   All the authoritative books agree with Brihat-Jataka about tl>e efficacy of Adhiyoga.  But some commentators of Jata a­
Parijat (a dependable book on astrology) said that if the 7th place from Chandra is occupied by Ravi the yoga may not be u fruitful as it should be.
   Kalyan Varma, renowned author of Saravali said that if those benefic planets are not combust or not associated with, malefic planets Adhiyoga will be effective.
Uttarakalamrita says  that  if  those  benefic  planets  are­
o.ccompanied by unfavourable planets Adhiyoga shall not impart. farnurable result.
   Many astrologers of high repute do not agree with Uttarakalamrita. Our experience is that even partial adbiyogas in many cases are found to be fruitful. Readers may see the­ horoscopes of Deshabandhu Chittaranjan Das, Rajendra Prasad

RAJAJOGAS	295
the first President of India, Swami Sivananda, the great disciple of Ramakrishna etc. In their horoscopes those benefic planets are associated with malefic planets too.
Maharshi Parasara has cited "Lagnadhi yoga" in the following
manner.
   Lagnadhi yoga :-If benefic planets are situated in the 6th, 7th or 8th houses from lagna it witt be named as Lagnadhi yoga.
So, we may differentiate the two yccgas by calling the first one
as Chandradhi yoga and the second one as Lagnadhi yoga.
   39. Snnapha yoga-If any planet or planets other than Ravi are placed in second place from Chand;-a it is terme<I as Sunapha yoga. Those who have this yoga may be wealthy, and powerful men like kings. The planets that form the yoga must be strong, otherwise the yoga may not be very effective. Weak planets positing in the second place from Chandra make the native an important man only in the environment he lives and monet.,ry aftluency witt be moderate.
   40. Anapba yoga-If the twelfth house from Chandra is occupied by a planet or planets other than Ravi this Anapha yoga is formed. To make the yoga very effective the yogakaraka planets must be strong,
   If a planet or planets situated ,n the 2nd or !2th house from Chandra are conjoined with Ravi the yogas will not be disturbed. But those yogakaraka planets shall not be combust.
Anapha yoga makes a ·,nan materially happy, he is healthy
famous and keeps good moral character.
   41. Dorodhara or Uncbary yoga-If the 2nd and 12th bous"cs from Chandra arc occupied by planets other than Ravi it is called Durudhara or Uvachary yoga.
   A man having this yoga is really a fortunate man. He is an owner of palatial building, possesses own car or cars, has great wealth and many servants to serve him, and commands over many men.
   42. When Sunapha yoga ia formed by Mangal (i.e. when Mangal is in the 2nd place from Chandra) the nstive will be a hypocrite, a man of resolute mind, courageoi,s, wealthy and short-tempered.
(I)  When Sunapha yoga  i,  formed by  Budha the native

HINDU SOIENOE OP THE FUTURE

becomes highly educated in vedic '1orms and rules, a great artist, is sweet-tongued and virtuous. He is a man of keen intellect.
   (ii) When Vrhaspathi causes this yoga the native is profoundly learned, born of a high family, prosperous, famous, a favourite person to king, very sympathetic to his own kith and kin and prosperous.
   (iii) If Sukra causes this yoga the native is a mighty man, energetic, owns movable and immovable properties and possesses vast landed property. He lives in an ostentatious style.
   (iv) If Sani forms Sunapha yoga the native is held in high esteem by men in villages and also in cities ; he is meritorious, wealthy and a business magnet.
   According to Brihat-Jataka the native hankers after other's wealth, is engaged in various type• of work and becomes a chairman of an assembly.
   43. (i) When Anapt" yoga is formed by Mangat (I.e. whan Mangal occupies the 12th place from Chandra) the native is an obstinate, head-s:rong and violent man. He is also a man of irritable temper and becomes a leader of a gang of robbers.
   (ii) If Budha is the cause of anapha yoga the native becomes an expert musician9 renowned artist. educated, an orator, a distinguished and handsome man. He is honoured by the king of the land.
   (iii) If Vrhaspathi is posited in the 12th place from Chandra the native is scrupulous to follow religious practices. He is energetic and spirited, moral-minded, just, wealthy and a distinguished person of extra-ordinary personality and sharp intellect.  He holds a topmost position in the society.
   (i•) If Sukra causes anapha yoga the native charms young women, he is a man of keen intellect, master of huge wealth, possesses cattle, horoes etc., and passes his days happily.
   (v) If Anapha yoga is formed by Sani the native is talented and a owner of cattle. He is a long armed man. He may be one of the leading personalities in the society. His words carry some weight, but he may be attached to women of loose morals. At the ,-.me time this is also to be remembered that Sani in the 12th place from Chandra is the cause of worries and anxieties, and loss of mental peace.

RAJAJOGAS	297
44. Durudbara yoga or Uvacbary yoga :
   (i) If Mangal and Budha are situated in the 2nd and 12th iplaces from Chandra the native 1,ecomes meritorious no doubt but he will be a liar, greedy and attached to a young woman of fbad character.
(ii) If the yoga is formed by Mangat and Vrhaspathi the
:native will be a man of name and fame. By dint of his treMendous
•labour and untiring efforts, he builds his own fortune but he is to face many enemies who create troubles even in his day-to-day
.activities. His moral-mindedness gives inspiration to bis family itl)embers also.
   (iii) If the yoga is formed \)y Mangat and Sukra the native 11Day be a wrestler.  l{e  is a handsome man, always cheerful,
-wealthy  and is desirous of acquiring religious knowledge.  But
.at times the native indulges in cruel acts.
(iv) If Sani and Mangat are  posited  in  tile 12th and 2nd
<!)laces from Chandra the native is addicted to low cast women. wealthy  and a  traitor.  He remains  unperturbed  even if he is
,surrounded by his  enemies and ultimately he can •ubdue them.
(v) If  Budha  and Sukra cause this yoga the native has great
.attachment to music and. art of dancing. He is a sweet-tongued, 'Very intelligent and sober person.
  (vi) If Budha and Sani are the cause of this yoga the native ikes to tour over many countries, acquires medium educ&tion,
-wealthy and  respected  by many  but  he  hates  his own kith
.and kin.
(•ii)  If Vrbaspathi and Sukra form this yoga the native is
.a pure-minded man, famous, valourous, gentle, cultured and i,rosperous. His habit and manner of talk are like that of a king.
   (viii) If Sani and Vrbaspathi are posited in the 12th and 2nd places from Chandra the native becomes gentle, modest, wise, 1earned, meritorious, wealthy, handsome and happy.
   (Ix) If Sani and Sukra are the cause of Durudhara yoga the native becomes a leader among men of his own class, always follows old customs, highly prosperous and wealthy and dear to the king of the land.
   45. Cbatars:.,1ara yoga-When Mesa, Karkata, Tula and Makar tasis are occupied by planets, this yoga ia formed provided

298	HINDU SCIENCE OP THE PUTURII
Lagoa rises in any of these rasis. These rasis are natural kendra positions in the Zodiac.  Compare this with Kamala yoga.
   Chatursagara yoga makes a native highly intelligent, vastly learned, glorious and a powerful king.
   46. Ekabali yoga-When each planet is situated in a rasi including lagna one after another the yoga thus formed is termed as Ekabali. This sloka is quoted from Somajataka. Similar sloka is found in Bhavakautuhala. Ekabali yoga makes a man a king of kings, pious, and a son of an honest fa!her. He subdues all his enemies.
The following yogas are quoted from Jataka-Parijat :
   (I have selected a few important yogas only. Inquisitive students may find vast number of Rajayogas in Jataka-Parljat and other authoritative treatises on astrolog} ).
   47. If all the planets are situated in Kanya, Mesa, Tula, Simha. and Kumbha the native becomes a king.
   48. If the 3rd, 4th and 5th houses are occupied by all the planets the native becomes a king.
   49. If all the planets are posited in Chandra's Hora the native becomes a famous king.	.
50. If all the benefics are  in the 9th and 11th houses and
malefic planets occupy 6th and 10th houses the native becomes a
king.
   51. If the 10th lord is posited in the 8th place and occupiei. his exalted house, own or friendly house in navamsa chakra or that lord of the 10th !louse acquires "Paravat Varga" the native becomes lord of all kings. A planet is said to be in Para vat Varga, if he acquires bis own six Vargas.
   52. If debilitated	Vrhaspathi be in lagna (this meani. Vrhaspathi is in Makara rasi), 8th place is occupied by malefic or rnalefics and the 8th lord be posited in a malefic house in navamsa. chart the native becomes a lord of ..11 ki&gs.
   53. There are five kinds, ..f Rajayogas mentioned ill> Phaladipika and Jataka-i'arljat. All the yogas are called by different name.). viz. :-
   (i) When Mangal being in his owu house, house of exaltation or Mooltrikona is posited in any kendra it is called Ruchaka yoga.

RAJAJOGA8	299,

   (ii) When Budha being in his own, exalted or Mooltrikona house is situated in any kendra it is called Bhadra yoga.
  (iii) When	Vrhaspathi also	be posited in the aforesaid position it is termed as Hamsa yoga.
   (iv) Similarly if Sukra be situated in the lik.e manner it is termed as Malavya yoga.
   (v) If Sani be placed in kendra and occupies his own, exalted or Mooltrikona house it i.s termed as Sasa yoga.
   Ruchaka yoga-makes a man strong-built, healthy, fortunate, glorious and highly qualified. He who has "Ruchaka" yoga in his birth chart is highly proficient in many branches of science. He knows the secret of •·Mantra-sakti" and by enchanting mantras he can possess a great power of incantation. The native is very beautiful to look at, kind, benevolent, wealthy and successful in all his endeavours. He passes his days very happily and lives upto 70 years of age.
   Bhadra yoga-The native's face is ferocious like that of a tiger, his movement is like that of an elephant, he has broad chest, muscular arms and manly figure. He is energetic and spirited, he is very much affectionate to his friends and kith and kin. The native will be a famous king, his treasury will be full of precious stones. Longivity will be 80 years of age.
   Hamsa yog-The native has a gracefully tall figure, his face has the lustre of red lotus, he has sharp nose, extraordinarily beautiful feet. His complexion is like that of 'kandarpa' (god of love and beauty), he is endowed with all virtues and has a beautiful wife. He is a true religious-minded man, passes his days by reading Puranas and religious scriptures and lives upto 82 years of age.
   Mal&Yf& yqg-Tbe native has graceful figure, manner of his movement is very beautiful, be has large beautiful eyes, hand-­ some complexion and his facial cut will also be beautiful. His lower lip is thick. He is highly qualified and powerful and may acquire wide knowledge about religious scriptures. He is energetic and knows the secret of incantation. He :njoy1 happiness amon1 his own children and grand-children and live upto 77 years of age. He may have illegal attachment with other's wife or wives,

300	HINDU BOIENCE 01' THE FUTURE
   Sasa yoga-Complexion of the native is black, be bas ugly and blood-shot eyes; he is brave, energetic, devoted to mother, munificent and charitable but cruel. In order to attain knowledge of metal and mineral he will cheat others. He would like to live in an ostentatious style and will be lascivious and addicted to other's wife. His longivity is 70 years of age,
   54. If at least any one of the lords of the 2nd, 9th and I Ith houses is situated in kendra position from Chandra and Vrhaspathi is the lord of the 11th house the native rules over a great empire.
   This is quoted from Jataka-Parijat but Phaladlpika slightly differs from Jataka-parijat. According to Phaladipika the yoga will be formed if Vrhaspathi being the lord of the 11th house is combined with the 5th lord. Other conditions are the same as Jataka-parijat.
   55. Bhaskar yoga-If Budha is in the 2nd place from Chandra or Chandra in the 11th place from Budha and Vrhaspathi is posited in 9th place from Chandra the native will he brave, beautiful to look at, resolute, efficient and a very important man in the country or the society. He has sonorous voice and ;s vastly learned in many shastras and is able to explain correctly the inner meaning of them.
   56. Indra yoga-If Mangat is posited in the 3rd place from Chandra, Sani is in the 7th place from Mangat and Vrhaspathi is in the 7th house from Sukra, the native is modest, gentle, peace-loving and as prosperous as a king. He is powerful', wealthy, earns name and fame.
57. Marut y11ga-lf Vrhaspath·i is situated in any trikona
place (5th & 9th house) from Sukra, Chandra is in the 5th place from Vrhaspathi and Ravi is in kendra from Chandra the native is a renowned orator, learned in many shastras, and prosperous like a king.  Be has bulky belly, broad chest and is highly
successful.in trade.
   Budha yoga-If Vrhaspathi is associated with lagna, Chandra is in a kendra from Vrhaspathi, Rahu is posited in the 2nd place from Chandra and Ravi and Mangat occupy the 3rd place from Chandra the native is;,_ very powerful man, he is very talented, learned in many shastras, famous and very expert in automobile
engfncering.

RAJAJOGAS	301
   59. Lagnadbi yoga-If benefic plane\S are posited in the 6th, 7th and 8th places from lagna and they are not aspected by or associated with any malefics and also the 4th house from lagna is not associated with ar.y malefic this yoga makes a man noble­ minded, oenevolent, unprejudiced !lnd a philosopher. His name and fame spreads throughout the world and he is widely known as a wealthy man. He will be author of many treatises on science.•
   This sloka is quoted f ·om P!lrasari Hora. Jataka-Parijat also has given much importance to this yoga but there are a few commentators who hold this opinion that the yoga will be very much effective if unfavourable planets from their positions in any house other than the 4th place donol asi:,ect or con,bine with those benefic planets.
   60. Gajakesbari yoga-If Vrhaspatlii is posited in any kendra (angular place) from Chandra, ot when Vrhaspathi, Sukra and Budha are not combust or debilitated and have full aspect on Chandra Gajakeshari yoga is formed.
The native having this yoga in his birth-chart will be energetic,
meritorious, efficient, affluent and dear to the king of the land.
   61. Jeeva yoga-When Chandra and Vrhaspathi are situated in the 7th place from each other this yoga is termed as Jeeva yoga.
The native becomes benevolent, learned, efficient, affluent and
energetic.
   The result of Gajakcshari and Jeeva yogas are almost identical to each other.
   62. Parvata yoga"--(i) If favourable planet or planets are placed in any kcndra from lagna and 6th or 8th place are associated with benefic planet or those places remain vacant, or
   (ii) If Lagnapathi ( lagna-lord ) and Vyayapathi (twelfth lord) are situated in kcrdra from each other and they arc aspectcd by friendly planets Par'8ta yoga is formed.
Sec the birth chart of Sir Ashutosh Mookhcrjee.
   Lagoa is in Vrsa, Ravi, Budha, Sukra in Mithuaa, Sani in Kanya, Vrhaspathi and Rahu in Tula, Chandra and Mangal in Mina and Ketu in Mesa.


* This LagJJadhi yoga ia slightly different from *he oue stat.ed earlier,

302	HINDU SOIENOE OF BIi FUWRII
Here Lagnapathi Sukra and 12th lord Mangal are in angular
,positions from each other.
   The ·native having Parvata yoga in his birth chart will be prosperous, noble, benevolent, energetic, powerful, spirited, an illustrious person, and a supreme personality in an institution. He is highly educated and learned. If the 9th lord, lagna lord, or Vrhaspathi and Sani are afflicted the native may be attached to women other than his wife.
63. Xahala yoga-(i)  If the 4th lord and 9th lord are posited
in kendra from each other, or
   (ii) The 4th lord being in his own or exalted house is combined with or aspected by 10th lord this yoga is formed.
The yoga makes a man the ruler 1f many villages, very daring
and successful administrator.
See the above chart of Sir Ashutosh.
   64. Malika or Mala yoga-Mala means garland. When planets adorn houses one after another the!planets look like a garland, hence the yoga is called Mala or Malika.
   The seven planets may sit in 7 places one after another from lagna, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th houses etc.
Any one of them may be called Mala yoga but they have
different results, such as:-
   (i) If from Lagna planets are situated in '7 places one after another the native becomes a king and lord of many horses and elephants.
(ii) If from the 2nd place planets are seated in 7 houses one
after another the native becomes a lord of huge wealth ; he is devoted to his parents, a man of resolute mind. sober, highly meritorious, talented and king of kings.
   (iii) When from the third h use the Mala yoga is formed the native is courageous, but he is sickly. But Brihat Jataka says that the native becomes a popular leader and is a handsome person.
   (iv) If the yoga is formed from the 4th house the native becomes a noble-minded man. a very wealthy king having sovereignty over many·countries.
   (v) If the yoga is formed from the 5th house the native becomes a king, religiously observes sacrificial rites or for any other religious deeds he is noted as a famous king.

RAJAJOGAB	303

   (vi) If the yoga is formed from the 6th house the native will "'t least orce suffer from penury but at any period of his life he shall earn huge wealth and shall lead a happy life.
   (vii) If the plan ts one after another are situated from the 7th house, he will be loved by many beautiful wives and shall be a king.
   (viii) If from the 8th house the Mala yoga is formed the native will be a famou• man and long livtd but be will be poor
.acd a henpecked husband.
   (ix) If Mala yoga is formed from the 9th place the native shall be a highly talented and powerful man engaged in religious
.austerities.
   (x) If it is from the 10th place the native is engaged in t'eligious ,usterities, respected by all and is an honest person.
   (.,i) If the Malika (Mala) yoga is formed from the 11th house the native is born of a royal family, very efficient and a husband
-0f women of paragon of beauty.
(.,ii)  If Mala yoga is formed  from the 12th house the native
,is very open-handed in spending money and held in high esteem by all.
Besides Mala yoga some authorities mentioned  "Samrata
yoga" which is formed when planets occupy all houses beginning
·from lagna upto the 6th place.  The name of the yoga is quite
.indicative of its meaning.
See the birth-chart of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru.
   65. Samkha yoga-When the lords of the 5th and 6th houses arc posited in angular position from each other, or if the lords of lagna and the 10th house occupy cardinal rasis and the 9th lord is strong the yoga is called as Samkba yoga.
   The native is luxurious, kind-minded, virtuous, learned in many shastras, and orthodox. He observes all religious rites, is a happy man with bis good wife and children and also owns la ded
,property.  His longivity is 81 years.
   66. Bhairi yoga-If lagna. 2nd, 7th and 12th places are occupied by planets, the 10th lord is powerful, or Sukra and lagna-lord arc posited in a kendra from Vrbaspathi and the 9th lord is strong the yoga is called "Bhairi".
   He who has this yoga in his birth chart is born of high family, free from disease, owller of many landed properties, and wealthy,

304	HINDU SOIBNOE OF THE FCTU!lB
and a noble and mighty man. His wife and children too earn, name and fame and their virtuous deeds give him unmixed joy. The native is an experienced person in ,vordly affairs.
   67. Srlnath yoga-If the 7th lord is posited in the 10th place. and the 10th lord is in the house of exaltation and is associated> with the lord of the 9th house the yoga thus formed is called. Srinath yo11a.
The native having this yoga becomes as powerful as the Lord
Indra.
   68. Matsa yoga-If the 9th and 5th places are occupied by papa (malefic) and suva (benefic) planets respectively and the 4th 01 8th house is associated with malefic planets the yoga is termed as Matsa.
  The native having this yoga in his chart becomes an astrologer. He is kind-hearted, virtuous, intelligent, educated, talented ano a famous man.
This is to be noted that complete yoga as enunciated by
different authors is not always found. In many cases the central idea of a yoga is to be considered and the result as indicated by. authors will be evident.
   To cite an example, let me quote a birth-chart. Lagoa is in, Dhanu, the 3rd house is occupied by the lords of 9th, 7th and 3ro combined with Ketu, 4th house is occupied by Sukra, the 5th• place by Vrhaspathi, the 9th ho'Jse by Rahu and the 11th, place is occupied by Chandra and Mangal.
   Here the 9th place is occupied by a malefic, the 5th house by a benefic planet and the 8th lord is conjoined with a natura malefic planet Mangal. Again, the 4th lord is aspected by the· lord of the 8th house. The first two conditions are fulfilled ands in case of the third if we take the central idea of the yoga we· shall find that all the conditions are fulfilled.
   The native of this birth chart is an astrologer. He is handsome, highly educated, and is known as kind-hearted and religiously inclined person.
   69. Lakshmi yoga-If the lord of the 9th house being in his­ Mooltrikona sign is posited in any kendra or kona from lagna and the lagna-lord is in his exalted house and strong the yoga is. termed as Lakshmi yoga.

RAJAJOGAB	306

   The native under the influence of this yoga will be king of kings, highly talented, educated, very handsome like "Kandarpa" (lord of love and beauty). He will be respected by kings of many countries and will be blessed with sons.
   70. Kurma yoga-If Benefics are in the 5th, 6th and 7th places from lagna and malefics occupy lagna, 3rd and I Ith places and those benefic and malefic planets in the navamsa chart occupy their own sign, signs of Mooltrikona or house of exaltation Kurma yoga is formed.
   The native becomes talented, pious, sober, happy and a public leader. His sweet conduct attracts the attention of the king of the land. One out of many noble deeds of the native is that he always tries to come to rescue his friends in their calamitous days.
   71. Parijata yoga-If the lord of the rasi (sign) where lagna­ lord is situated is posited in any kendra or the navamsa lord of the sign where lagna lord is posited occupies kendra or kona from lagna or he sits in his own, mooltrikona or exalted sign the yoga thus formed is called "Parijata" yoga.
   This is a brilliant yoga that makes a man a king and master of many horses and elephants. He is a warrior, dignified, dutiful and kind-hearted man. He enjoys happiness at his middle and last stage of life.
   72. Kalanidhi yoga-When Vrhaspathi occupying the 2nd or 5th place from lagna is conjoined with or aspected by Budha or Sukra or occupies the house of Budba or Sukra the Kalanidhi yoga is formed.
   The native under the influence of this yoga is courageous and respected by many and owns many lands and houses and is surrounded by many followers who would look after his comfort. He is free from disease, does not encounter any danger and bas no enemy.
The  following  Rajayogas  are   quoted  from  Sarvartha
Chintamani, an authoritative treatise on astrology:
   73. If a planet is debilitated and the ford of the rasi of that debilitated planet and also the planet who is exalted in that house are placed in kendra from lagna the native becomes. virtuous and king of kings.
20

HINDU BOIIINOII OF THE J!'UTUBII

   To explain the yoga more explicitly-say Sani is debilitated in Mesa rasi. the lord of Mesa is Mangal and also Mesa rasi is Ravi's exalted house. Now, if both Mangal and Ravi arc situated in kendra from lagna Rajayoga will occur. Here it is not necessary for both Ravi and Mangal to occupy one kendra. Ravi may be seated in one and Mangal in another kendra from 4agna.
   74. If Chandra is situated in any kendra or kona other than lagna and She is aspected by any one of Vrhaapathi and Sukra the'11.ative shall be as fortunate as a king.
   According to Jataka-Parijat the yoga will be more effective if it is full moon.
75. When a planet is debilitated in the birth-chart but is in
,he house of exaltation in the navamsa chart the planet may give
,good result, but if it is otherwise, that is, when an exalted planet in the birth-chart is debilitated in navamsa chart that planet will not be in a position to give favourable result to the native.
   The following yogas are basically favourable Rajayogas and they are very effective and may be interesting to common readers.
   76. If Vrhaspathi is in lagna, and Budha is placed in any tendra and aspected by lagnapathi the native will be prosperous like a king.
   77. If Vrhas;,athi being in the 7th or in any kona (5th or 9th place ) is aspected by the lagnapatbi the native is as lucky as a t:ing.
   78. If Sani is in exalted house or in any kona house and is aspccted by the 10th lord the native will be as fortunate as a king.
   79. If the 10th lord being in the 8th house is posited in his exalted or friendly sign in navamsa chart or acquires Paravatamsa the native is the lord of kings. A planet when acquires 6 vargas of his own is said to be in "Paravatamsa".
   80. If Vrhaspathi being debilitated is posited in lagna (this means lagna rasi is in Makar) or the 9th lord is posited in the 11th house but Vrhaspaihi or the 9th lord is posited in exalted or friendly house in navamsa chart or they acquire Paravatamsa the
:native becomes king of kings.
81. If Na vamsa lord of Chandra and also Budha are placed in

BAJA10QAB	307

.kendra from lagna the native shall get the same result as said in pre-vious two yogas.
   82. If Chandra in combination with Mangat is posited in the 2nd or 3rd places from lagna and the 5th house is occupied by Rahu the same result will follow.
   83. If the navamsa lord of lagna conjoined with 9th lord be posited in the 4th or 5th place the native will be a very great Icing.
   84. If Rahu is in the 10th house, Sani aspected by the 91h lord he in the I Ith place and lagna-lord is conjoined with a debilitated planet the native becomes as prosperous as a king.
   The following few selected Rajayogas are quoted from Vllara­ Kalam,ita:
85,  (i)  Relation between the lords of 9th and 10th houses.
  (ii) Relation between the 9th and 10th lords from the 9th house from lagna.
   (iii) Relation between 9th and 10th lords from the 10th place from lagna.
   (iv) Relation among lord of the rasi where Chandra is situated, Chandra-navamsa-lord and Lagnapathi.
(v) Relation between 9th and 10th lords from Chandra.
(vi) Relation between 9th and 10th lords from Ravi.
   (vii) Relation among the lords of the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 7th places.
[viii)	Relation between the lords of the 2nd and 11th houses.
86. The following planets are beneficial :-
   (i) Sukra in the 12th, Budha in the 8th and Vrhaspathi in the 6th places.
   (ii) The lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th places are beneficial if they are situated in their own, exalted or friendly houses and
.are aspected by benefics. But if they are posited in inimical house, aspected by or conjoined with enemy planets or combust they are very unfavourable.
   (iii) Natural benefics when posited in kendra, 2nd, 3rd, 5th or 9th places are beneficial ; even benefics in the 6th house is favourable.
(iv) Natural malefics in Upachayasthana (3rd, 6th, 10th and
I Ith places are upachayasthanas) are favourable.

308	HINDU SCIENCE OJ!' rHE J!'UrORE

(v) Sani and Ravi in the 9th place is favourable.
   (vi) Sani when posited in his own sign, exalted sign or in the house owned by Vrhaspathi is favourabl,, even he is favourable in lagna if it is the house of Vrhaspathi.
   (vii) It is said that Sukra in the 12th house is favourable but if that 12th house is Sani's sign or Sukra being in the 12tn pbce be in Sani's house in navamsa chakra is not beneficial.
When a native becomes a millionaire ?
  (a) All the seven planets master over di1forent digits, such as Ravi 30 kala, Chandra 16 kala, Mangat 6, Budha 8, Vrhaspathi
10, Sukra 12 and Sani 1 kala.
   Now add together the kalas indicated above of the lords of the 9th place from Jagna and Chandra.  Divide the sum-total by
12 and the remainder will be the  number of rasi from  the
position of Chandra. If that rasi is owned by a benefic planet the native will be multimillionaire.
   (b) If any two or more lords of the 2nd, 5th, 9th and 11th houses from Chandra are related to each other by conjunction or aspect and they are aho strong the native will be master of lacs.
  (c) If that 9th house from Chandra is occupied by any malefic the native shall get thousand rupees, if that house (where malefic planet is situated) is the exalted sign of that malefic planet the native shall be a multimillionaire.
Let us illustrate this yoga :
   Lagna is in Makar, 9th place from Makar is owned by Budha who masters over 8, Chandra also is in Makar. In this case also the 9th lord is Budha. So, 8+8=16+12. Remainder is 4. From Chandra the 4th place is Mesa occupied by benefic planet Yrhaspathi who is exalted in navamsa chart. The native is a very wealthy man.
   If those planets are related to the lords of 6th, 8th or 12th houses the native will lose all assets, will be over head and ears in debt and also will be oppressed by his enemies.
   87. If all the planets are situated in kendra (from lagna) and there are no planet in Panafar .(2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th houses) and apoklima (3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th houses) benefic planets are strong and full moon is not conjoined with or aspected by any

RAJAlOGAS	309
malefic the native becomes a king or very infiuential public leader.
   88. If any native is born within 2 dandas after noon or midnight then he shall vanquish all his opponent& and shall become an emperor. He will be highly educated, pious and devoted to religious austerities.
   Again if in the birth-chart of that native any exalted planet is situated in the 2nd place from lagna, he will possess huge wealth. If that planet in the 2nd house is not exalted the native will be a moneyed man only,
   Here midday (i.e. no n) or midnight is to be calculated according to equation of time. We generally take noon hours when our clock strikes 12, if we calculate 12 hours according to equation of time it may not agree with hours as shown by our clock.
   The horoscope of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose nay be consulted.
Yogas that make• man educated and learned :
   There is a difference between education and learning. When we say that a inan is educated we mean that he has acquired knowledge in any branch of literature or science. This he can obtain through studies in school, college etc. When it is said that he is a learned man, which is termed as Vidya in Sanskrit we mean that he has acquired Jnana-knowledge of the supreme being, knowledge that gives us the clear idea of truth, truth of eternal bliss that may be obtained through meditation and by deep introspection.
   Here we shall mostly deal with education that is obtained through scholarship, experience and observation.
   Budha stands for education and Vrhaspathi is the only planet that gives us learning, Jnana or real Vid}a by which we acquire the knowledge of existence of God. Again, Vrhaspathi also helps a native acquire University education.
   Sukra also is a karaka of fine arts and an adjutant Budha. Similarly, fifth house stands for Vidya in general and education in particular thaf we obtain from schools and colleges and it b to be determined from Budha in general.
89. If the lord of the 4th house, Vrhaspathi, Budha and

310	HINDU SOlENOE 01!' THE l!'UTURE
Sukra are posited in their own or exalted houses and be placed in kendra or kona  the native becomes highly educated, learned, fortunate and popular.  But if they are situated in malefic houses. (6th, 8th or 12th place) combust, aspected by or conjoined with enemy or malefic planets gC1od effect may	be nullified or minimised.
   90. Second house also stands for such education through which a man earns his livelihood.
   So, if the lords of 2nd, 11th and lagna together are situated in the 2nd or ! Ith house the native not only may get good money but also acquire practical education that will help him earn a lot of money.
   91. If Budha anJ Sukra are placed in the 10th place from Chandra the native may acquire nigher education, he becomes wealthy and is blessed with a good wife.
   (i) Similar result may be obtained if from Chandra Vrhaspathi and Sukra are posited in the 10th place. The native over and above the favourable result referred to above will be the protector of religion enumerated by Brabmins.
92. If Ravi, Chandra and Budha are seated together the
native earns name and fame for his education.
   93. Combination of Ravi, Chandra and Vrhaspathi or Ravi, Budha and Vrhaspathi or Rav), Budha and Sukra is really a brilliant yoga that makes a man highly educated, learned and wise. He is widely known as a highly educated and learned man.
   This is also to be noted that Budha in the 11th house gives a man high education and keen intellect.
   94. If lagna is occupied by Budha or lord of the 2nd house or the lord of lagna is situated in the 2nd house and the 2nd house and its lord or lagnapathi or Budha is associated with or aspected by any benefic the native will be renowned for hi education.
   95. If Budha and Vrbaspathi being associated with Sukra are posited in the 9th house the native is not only renowned for his education but also is endowed with rnany qualities of head and heart.
   (i) If Budha and Vrhaspathi being' in the 9th house are conjoined with Sani the native is also a good orator.

RA1A10GAS	311
   96, If Vrhaspathi while positing in the 9th house is aspectcd by Chandra and Sani the native will be a. very talented man and will be an expert in an1lysing and explaining correctly the legal problems of foreign land.
   97, Again if Vrhaspathi occupying the 9th house is aspected by Budha and Sukra the native will be profoundly learned.
The above yogas are quoted from Jataka-Parijat.

The yogas that make a man astrologer and mathematician :
   98. If the 2nd house is occupied by Ravi and Budha, the native becomes an as.trologer and if those planets are aspected by Sani he will be a mathematician.
99. When Chandra and Mangat arc aspected by Budha and
occupy the 2nd house the native becomes a mathematician.
   (i) If any kendra is occupied by Budha and Chandra and Mangal are in the 2nd place,
(ii) If  Budha being exalted  is posited in the 2nd  house.
Lagna is occupied by Vrhaspathi and Sani is posited in 8th place from lagna,
(iii) If Sukra  is in the house of exaltation, and Vrhaspathi•
occupies kendra or kona position,
   (iv) If Budha is in the 2nd place from lagna, and Vrhaspathi, is situated in any kendra or kona,
The native becomes very much efficient in mathematics.
   (v) If Ravi and Budha together are posited in kendra, kona or I Ith place the native becomes efftcient in mathematics. The planets should be powerful.

Yoga that makes a man scientist :
   100. The native becomes versatile in many shastras if Chandra and Budha together are situated in any favourable place. He will specially be educated in many branches of science.
The yoga will be very effective if Chandra and Budha arc in
the 9th place from lagna.
   101, rr the planets occupying the 2nd, 4th, 5th and 10th houses and lords of lagna, 9th and 10th houses are strong i1>
Sada-varga  the native becomes  profoundly  learned in many

HINDU SOIBNOB OP fflB 1'1JTUBB

1hastras. He acquires profound knowledge in science and of Veda-Vedanga.
   The native having t!tis excellent yoga in his birth-chart will be known in the world as a mine of education.
   102. If Ravi, Budha and Sukra are situated in the 2nd place and be strong tbe native becomes a poet. Consult Rabindranath's horoscope.
   103. If the lord of drekkansthan of the 5th lord or the karaka planet (Vrhaspathi and Budha) is a naturally favourable plan t be posited in any kendra or kona and aapected by karaka planet or by any favourable planet the native can understand the inner meaning of any hint or suggestion. Bodha and Vrhaspathi are natural indicator of intellect.
   (i) The same effect is indicated if Ral1u is in the 5th place from lagna.
   104. If the 2nd pla• is occupied by powerful Vrbaspathi specially if he is posited in his own house or exalted house, the nativ shall be proficiently learned in Veda and Vedanga and is held in high esteem hy all great Pandits of the country.

Conveyances
   Maharshi Parasara and other authors of astrological treatise laid down much stress on Sukra as the principal significator of conveyance. Next comes the lord of the 4th house. So, Maharsi Parasara says :-
   105. If Sukra in conjunction with the lord of the 4th house occupies the 4th place from Lagoa, or if the 4th lord being in tbe 4th house or in the house of exaltation casts bis aspect over Sukra the native will possess excellent conveyance.
   106. If Ravi occupies the 4th house and the 4th lord happens to be in the highest exaltation point and is conjoined with Sukra the native gets conveyance of his own at the' age of 32 years.
   107. If the 4th lord being in the highest exaltation point is combined with the lord of 10th house the native shall own conveyance at his 42 years of age.
108. If 4th lord in conjunction with Vrhaspathi occupies
lagna the native has various kinds of conveyances, such as motor car, horse, elephant etc.

IIAJAJOGAB	313
   109. If the 11th lord is in the 4th house and the 4th lord in the 11th place from lagna the native shall· own conveyance at his 12 years of age.
I10.  If strong 4th lord is conjoined with a benefic or the lord
<if the 9th  house the native becomes lord of many countries and
,he has various kinds of conveyances.
   rThis is to be noted that the 4th lord and the benefic plaoet referred to above or the 9th lord who are conjoined with the lord
-0f the 4th house must be powerful and occupy a favourable place. Otherwise the result will not be very effective].
11I.	When the 4th lord is in a kendra and the lord of that
kendra occupies lagna or the 10th Jord is in Jagna and Jagnapathi
is in the 10th house the native owns a number of conveyances.
   112. If the 4th lord is po,ited in the house owned by Man gal, lagna is occupied by a benefic aod a favourable planet is situated in lagna the native will be a king and he shall be an owner of many conveyances besides wealth and jewels.
   113. If the 2nd lord is in lagna and the lord of the 10th house is posited in the 2nd house the native shall possess many
-conveyances.
   114. If the 12th lord being in the house of exaltation is conjoined with the lord of the 2nd house and the 9th lord c sts hisfull aspect on them the native will possess conveyance.
   II 5. When the 10th lord is in the 4th place, the 4th lord in the 11th, and Jagna receives the aspect of a favourable planet the native owns many conveyances.
Ownership of Honses
116. If the lord of the 4th house conjoined with lagnapatbi
,occupies the 4th place the native will have a house of his own.
   If these two planets occupy any unfavourable place (such as 6th, 8th or 12th place) there is possibility ofloss of the house.
   117. If the lord of either lagna or the 4th place in combination with a benefic is posited in kendra or kona the native will have a house of his own.
   118. If the 4th lord in conjunction with the lord of the 10th place occupies any kendra or kona the native shall own a palatial building enclosed with beautiful wall.

314	HINDU SCIENCE OP THE ll'UTURE
   I19. If the lord of navamsa of the 4th lord and the lord of rasi where that navamsa lord is posited and both of them are situated in a kendra the native will have a house of his own.
   120. If the 4th house is conjoined with an exalted planet, the 9th lord is in a kendra and the lord of the 4th house is placed in his exalted or friendly house the native may have many beautiful houses of his own.
  (i) Maharshi Parasara says, if the 4th house, 4th lord and the karaka planet are posited in cardinal house the native may build many houses in many places.
   121. If the third place is associated with a benefic planet and the 4th lord occupies his own house the native shall have a beautiful house of his own enclosed with wall.

Prabrajya or Sannyas yoga ( religious mendicancy )
   122. When the 10th lord being conjoined with 4 planets be placed in any kendra or kona the yoga is termed as Prabrajya or Sannyas.
   See the horoscope of Mahapravu Sri Chaitanya. His horoscope reads tbus :
   Lagna in Simba with Chandra and Ketu, Sani in Vrscika, Vrhaspathi and Mangal in Dbanu, Ravi, Budba, Sukra and Rahu in Kumbba rasi.
   • Here 4 planets are in kendra from both lagna and Chandra and of these 4 planets one (i.e. Sukra) is the lord of 10th house.
   • I owe an apology to my readers for quoting in my Jyotish Y'Oga Sanchayan written in Bengali a wrong chart drawn by Sri
B. V. Raman in bis 'One hundred notable horoscopes'.			In Chaitanya	Bhagabat and Chaitanya Charitamrita	the two authoritative treatise on His (Maha Prat>hu Sri Chaitanya) life activitie& Simba lagna and Simha rasi were mentioned.		It wu asserted that after the birth of such a great personality  His maternal grandfather Nilambar Chakravarty by name a great scholar of his time and vastly learned in astrology erected bis birth chart where Simha lagna and Simha rasi were mentioned and it is no less a person than that erudite scholar (in many branches of shastras) prophesied that a great man almost god incarnate was born.

RAIAJOOAS	315•
   123. Only 4 planets together when occupy any kendra may cause Sannyas yoga.
   124. If Sani is aspected by the lord of lagna or he has aspect on the latter ( lord of lagna ) and no other planet has aspect on lagnapathi or Sani unaspected by any planet casts his aspect on lagna-lord and both lagna-lord and Sani are weak it is Sannyas yoga.
   125. When Chandra falls in the drekkan or navamsa of Sani or Mangal and is aspected by Sani it makes a man Sannyari.
See the  horoscope of Swami Vivekananda (Quoted from 100
Notable horoscopes by Sri B. V. Raman.)
   Lagna in Dhanu, Lagnaspbuta 27°-31', Ravi in Makara 0-52', with Budha 13°-13' and Sukra 8'-32', in the 5th house Mangal 7°-46', in the 6th Ketu 23°-41', in the 10th Chandra 18°-54' and Sani 15°-2' in	the	11th Vrhaspathi 5°-28' and	in	the 12th Rahn 23°-41'.
   (If we accept Sri Lahiri's Ayanamsa Ravi will be in the last degree of Dhanu. This was also acceptable to all astrologers of wide reputation of Bengal before Sri Lahiri's Ephemeris was out in the market).
   In the birth chart of Swami Vivekananda Chandra is' posited in Sani's drekkan and She is associated with Sani, See birth chart of Swami Sibananda (Quoted from Notable horoscopes):-
   Lagoa in Karkata 29° with Mangal 16°-41', Sani 21°-28' and Rahu 26°-30', in the 2nd Ravi 24°-18' and Budha 21°-32' in the 3rd Sukra• 14°-18', in the 4th Vrhaspathi 12•.42', in the 7th Ketu 26°-30' and in the 10th Chandra 24'-13'.
   Here Chandra in the navamsa of Mangal receives the full a pect of Sani.
   The yogas no. 124. and 125 have three conditions to effect Sannyas yoga.
   (i) Chandra should be in either Sani"s drckkan or in the navamsa of Sani or Mangal and Chandra receives aspect of no other planet than Sani.
(ii) Sani and lagnapathi will be weak,
   {iii) Further Sani will have full aspect on lagna lord. All these conditions are fulfilled in the horoscope of Swami Sibananda.

'316	HINDU BOil!NOE OF' THB F'UTUBB

   126. If Lagoa rises in any of the houses owned by Mangal, Vrhaspathi or Sani and Vrhaspathi is posited in the house of luck and also there are rajayogas in the birth chart the native visits many holy shrines and for bis sacred and religious deeds he becomes widely known in the world.
   127. If Chandra unaspected by any planet be posited in either 9th or 10th house from lagna the native in spite of powerful rajayoga in the chart becomes a person of great reputation only after be embraces 'Sannyas dharma'.
Here "aspect'' should be construed as "full aspect".
   In the birth chart of Swami Vivekananda Chandra is situated in the 10th place from lagna and She (Chandra) does not receive any full aspect of any other planet.
   128. If Vrhaspathi is posited in the 9th and lagna, Chandra and Vrhaspathi are aspected by Sani the native preaches a new religious doctrine and earns great name and fame. (The result as said above will be very effective provided the chart contains powerful rajayoga).
Please see the 'rasicbakra' (birth chart) of Maha Prabhu Sri
-Chaita.nya. Vrhaspathi has full aspect on the 9th house, Sani aspects lagna and Chandra.
   'Vaisbnaba' dbarma in the truest sense was introduced by Him and He is taken to be God Incarnate by the Vaishnaba world. Even his staunch opponents have great regard for bis wonderful meritorious deed in the country at a time when people were apostate and impious and were unscrupulous. Chaitanya juga is rightly called by historians a period .of renaissance in Bengal.
   129. If Sani is posited in the 9th and is not aspccted by any other planet and al,o there are powerful rajayogas in the birth
<:h11rt the  native becomes a Sannyasi and his greatness as a man is widely known throughout the world  and afterwards he enjoys all the beneficial results of rajayogas.
   130. When the following pla'nets be strong and arc posited together in 'Sama' (even) .rasi the native becomes a devoted ascetic leading true religious life.
(Vrsa, Karkata, Kanya, Vrscika, Makar and Mina-these six
-rasis arc Sama-even-rasis)

RAIAIOGAS	3l'i
(i) Ravi, Mangal, Sukra and Sani
(ii) Vrhaspathi, Mang !. Ravi and Sani ·
(iii) Chandra, Mangal, Vrhaspathi and Sani
   131. If Ravi, Chandra, Mangat, Vrhaspathi and Sukra these 5 planets together arc associated with Budha or Sani the native becomes an ascetic and his eyesight is so sharp that he can see and identify very easily and accurately even a very small thing. from a great distance.
132. The  following combination  of planets make a man
'Sannyasi' :
(i) Mangat, Ravi, Chandra, Sani and Vrhaspathi
(ii) Mangat, Ravi, Budha, Sani and Sukra
(iii) Mangat, Chandra, Ravi, Sukra and Sani
(iv) Mangal, Ravi, Sukra, Sani and Vrhaspathi
(v) Mangal, Chandra, Budha, Sukra and Sani.

When Sannyas yogas are to be taken as defunct ?
   133. When yogakaraka planet or planets are associated with Rahu, Ketu or Gulik and he (or they-yogakaraka planets) is­ posited in a malefic navamsa then the native abandons the life of asceticism and is considered as a renegade by people at large.
   (Only aisociation of Rahu, Ketu or Gulik with yogakaraka· planets will not nullify the sacred effect of asceticism. The yogakarakas must be positioned also in malefic navamsa).
   134. If the yogakaraka planet or planets in spite of their strength be sunk down by the Sun's rays or be combust the native holds greatest regard for 'Sannyas dharma' but he cannot be a 'Sannyasi'.
135. When  yogakaraka  planets are overpowered  by other
planets the native cannot embrace 'Sannyas dharma' in spite of aapect of beneficial planet on the yogakarakas.

Yogas of glorious and virtuous deeds :
   136. When the 10th lord, lord of the 2nd and Budha are powerful the native performs sacrificial rites.
   137. If the 10th place is occupied by Budha and the 10th lord is not aspected by or conjoined with a malefic but is aspectecl" by a benefic the native performs sacrificial rites.

HINDU SOIENOE 01' THE FUTUBE

138. If the 10th lord Budha is in the house of exaltation or
-be in the 9th house from lagna but not in conjunction with Rahu
-0r Ketu the same result may be predicted.
   139. If the 10th lord is exalted and aspected by Budha or the 10th lord being in his own house is aspected by a favourable planet the native performs sacrificial rites.
   140. If Chandra occupies Karkata rasi (cancer-sign) and is
aspected by Vrhaspathi and Sukra the native earns name and fame for his glorious deeds.
   141. This is also a yoga of virtuous deeds if Chandra acquires Piiriivat Varga (when a planet attains 6 Vargas of his own is said to be in Paravatamsa).
   142. A person becomes famous for his glorious deeds if in his birth chart 10th lord conjoined with a benefic is situated in a favourable nava.nsa or is posited between benefics.
   143. If the 10th lord is a natural benefic and be posited in the house of exaltation, his own or friendly house or friendly
•navamsa the native earns name and fame for his glorious deeds.
   144. When the lord of Lagoa is strong, lord of luck is situated in Simha rasi in navamsa chakra and lord of the 10th house acquires Devalokavarga (acquiring 7 vargas of a planet's
-own sign) the native becomes a famous man for his meritorious and virtuous deeds and is greatly adored by all.
   (In spite of all these yogas if Ravi and Sani together are situated in the 10th house and are as'pected by or conjoined with a malefic or seated in a malefic navamsa the native loses his name and fame for his misdeeds and is decried by all).
Taking bath in holy river or sea :
Hindus consider the following rivers and sea as holy stream :
   They are The Ganges of Pr81¥ag and Kalighat, ::lindhu (Sind river), Yamuna, Rameswar Setu Banda, Sagara-Sangama.
   145. When full moon is in the watery sign, Vrhaspathi is in the 10th house the native shall have bath in any of these holy
:streams.
   146. Similar result happens if the 12th place is occupied by Budha and the 12th lord is seated in the house of exaltation.

RAJAJOG..lS	319

   147. If the 9th lord being in the watery sign be posited in any kendra from lagna the native shall have bath in holy water.
148. Chandra  being associated  witll a benefic if posited in
the 3rd house from lagna the native shall have bath in holy
water.

The yogas that make a man an Orator or eloquent speaker :
   149, If the natural benefic be the lord of the 2nd house and is situated in any kendra or kona and is aspected by or associated witb. a benefic planet the native may be an eloquent speaker.
   150. When the 2nd lord be in his highest exaltation point or acquires 'Paravat1 varga the yoga makes a man an excellent orator.
151. Similarly the navamsa lord of the lord of the 2nd house
if associated with a benefic is in his highest point of exaltation or acquires Gapur varga (a planet acquiring 4 vargas of his own) makes a native good orator.
   152. When Budha being in Vargotroma navamsa be in conjunction  with Vrhaspathi who acquires  Simhasana varga ( a planet acquiring 5 vargas of his own ) slso makes a native very great speaker.
The following configuration of planets make a native a good
orator:
153. (i)	When the 2nd lord is conjoined with a benefic or be
in Vargottoma navamsa.
   (ii) If the 4th lord associated with Vrhaspathi acquires Paravat varga.
   (iii) When Chandra and Budha together are situated in the 9th house.
   This is also to be noted that the second house signifies mouth as well as power of speech. Similarly Budha and Vrhaspathi primarily are significators of speech.
   Therefore when these two planets along with the 2nd lord are powerfully posited the native must be a good orator, a fluent speaker and pleasant conversationalist.

CHAPTER XV

ASTHA VARGA SYSTEM

   Though our birth chart shows the stationary positions of all planets they are actually not so but moving every hour, minute and second. We should say that planets are transiting through their orbit and their movements arc constant. They are found in stationary positions at the time of birth which means, they imbibe some strength, energy or weakness, virtues, merits or demerits in the native at the time of birth. These virtues, qualities, merits or demerits will actively play in the native by which he wi1l either rise, shine or go down, But at any given time after birth these planets which we find as if stationary in the birth chart will be found moving constantly. Their constant movement in different places provide the native with energy, power of activity, and at other cimes t1ansit of some plane.ts bi: the cause of morbid state of mind or activity to the native.
   By asthavarga system we can ascertain the various sources of energy for all seven planets. Rahu and Ketu are not taken into consideration in determining the source of energy in calculation of asthavarga, whereas lagna is an important thing in this calculation.
   In short wo may say that asthavarga helps us to estimate the stability, good or evil results pertaining to each bhava, or strength or weakness of a bhava on account of transit of planets.
   As for example if Mangat is situated in Vrscika at the time of birth, he may be in Dhanu after 45 days and will be in Makar rasi after next 45 days. Asthavarga records the results of such transits.
   We are to draw asthavarga charts of each planet and in each chart benefic houses from all the 7 planets and lagna are to be recorded by putting. rekhas or vertical small lines. We show hereafter the benefic houses of 7 planets in asthavarga chart of each planet.

ASTHAVARGA SYSTEM	321
Ravi's astbavarga :
From Ravi auspicious places-1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th
and !Ith.
From Chandra auspicious places-3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th. From Mangal auspicious places--lst, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th,
                                       10th and 11th. From Budha auspicious places-3rd, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th, 11th
and 12th.
From Vrhaspathi auspicious places-5th, 6th, 9th and 11th. From Sukra auspicious places-6th, 7th and 12th.
From Sani auspicious places-1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th
                                             and 11th. From  Lagna  auspicious  places-3rd, 4th, 6th, 10th, II th and
12th.
Total-48

Chandra's asthavarga :
From Ravi auspicious places-3rd, 6th, 7th, 8th, 10th and II th. From Chandra auspicious places-1st, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 10th, 11th, From Mangat auspicious places-2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th
                                           and 11th. From Budha auspicious places-1st, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 8th,
                                       10th and 11th. From Vrhaspathi auspicious places-1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th,
                                       10th and 11th. From Sukra  auspicious  places-3rd, 4th, 5th, 7th. 9th, !0th
and 11th.
From Sani auspicious places-3rd, 5th, 6th and 11th. From Lagna auspicious places-3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th.
Total-49
  *	According to Brihat-Jataka, from Vrhaspathi auspicious places are 1st, 4th, 7th, 8th, 10th, 11th and 12th, Jataka•Parijat
alsu followed Brihat-Jataka.  But we follow Parasari Hora.

Mangal's asthavarga :
From Ravi benefic places-3rd, 5th, 6th, 10th and 11th. From Chandra benefic places-3rd, 6th and 11th.
From Mangal benefic places-1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 10th, I lt'l.
21

322	HINDU SOll!NOE OF THE FUTURE

From Budha benefic places-3rd, 5th, 6th and 11th.
From Vrhupathi benefic placeS-6th, 10th, 11th and 12th. From Sukra benefic places-6th, 8th, 11th and 12th.
From Sani benefic places-1st, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th & 11th. From Lagna benefic places-Isl, 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th.
Total-39
Budba's astbavarga :
From Ravi benefic placeS-5th, 6th, 9th, 11th and 12th.
From Chandra benefic places-2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th & 11th. From Mangal benefic planets-1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th
                                           and 11th. From Budha benefic places-1st, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th, 11th
and 12th.
From Yrhaspathi benefic places-6th, 8th, 11th and 12th. From Sukra benefic places-1st, :lnd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th and
11th.
From Sani bonefic places-1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th
                                           and 11th. From Lagna benefic places-1st, 2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th,10th & 11th.
Total-54
Vrbaspatbl's astbavarga :
From Ravi benefic places-1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th,
10th and II th.
From Chandra benefic placeS-2nd, 5th, 7th, 9th and 11th. From Mangal benefic places-1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 10th, 11th.
From Budha benefic places- 1st, 2nd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th
                                           and 11th. From Yrhaspathi benefic places-1st, 2nd. 3rd, 4th, 7th, 8th,
10th and 11th.
From Sukra benefic placeS-2nd, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th and 11th. From Sani benefic places-3rd, 5th, 6th and !2th.
From Lagna benefic places-1st, 2nd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 9th,
10th and 11th.
Total-56
Sukra's asthavarga :
From Ravi benefic placeS-8th, 11th and 12th.
From Chandra benefic places-1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th,
11th and 12th,

ASTHAVARGA SYSTEM	323
From Mangal benefic places-3rd, 4th, 6th, 9th,llth and12th­ ( According to Brihat-Jataka-3rd, 5th, 6th, 9th, 11th & 12th). From Budha benefic places-3rd, 5th, 6th, 9th and 11th.
From Vrhaspathi benefic places-5th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 1Ith, From Sukra  benefic places-1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th,
                                       10th and 11th. From Sani benefic places-3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th, 10th & 11th. From Lagna benefic places--tst, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th. 9th
and 11th.
Total-52
Sani's asthavarga :
From Ra vi benefic places-Ist, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 10th & 11th. From Chandra benefic places-3rd, 6th and 11th.
From Mangal benefic places-3rd, 5th, 6th, 10th, 11th & 12th. From Budha benefic places-6th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th. From Vrh;,spathi benefic places-5th, 6th, 11th and 12th.
From Sukra benefic places-6th, 11th and 12th. From Sani benefic places-3td, 5th, 6th and 11th.
From Lagoa benefic places-1st, 3rd, 4th, 6th, 10th and 11th.
Total-39
Lagna asthavarga :
From Ravi benefic places-1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 10th & 11th, From Chandra benefic places-3rd, 6th and 11th.
From Mangal benefic places-3rd, 5th, 6th and II th. From Budha benefic places-6th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th. From Vrhaspathi benefic places-5th, 6th, 11th and 12th. From Sukra benefic places-6th, 11th and 12th,
From Sani benefic places-3rd, 5th, 8th, 10th and 11th,
From Lagna henefic places-1st, 3rd, 4th, 6th. 10th and 1lth.
Total-37
•Rabu's astbavarga :
From Ravi benefic places-2nd, 3rd, 4th, 6th and 9th. From Chandra benefic places-1st, 3rd, 4th and 6th. From Mangal benefic places-3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th and 9th.

  ,:,Though Rahn and Ketu are not taken into consideration•' the time of asthavarga calculation by majority of eminent astrologers ihere a.re a. few notv.ble astrologers who prefer to iµclude Bahu in ca.lculaiiIJ.g asth•varga. Hence we have chosen to record Rabu's asthavarga for those students who may follow the latilE group of astrologers. We have discussed about it in the next paragraph.

32i     HINDU SOIENOE OP !rHE POTOBE
From Budha benefic placea-lst, 2nd, 3rd, 5th and 9th. From Vrhaspathi benefic places-3rd, 4th, 6th and 9th. From Sukra benefic places-2nd, 3rd, 5th and 9th.
From Sani benefic places-2nd, 5th and 6th.
From Rahu benefic places-1st, 4th, 5th, 6th and 9th. From Lagna benefic placeS--4th, 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th.
                                     Total-40 Asthavargas of lagoa and. Rahu are not mentioned in Brihat­
Jataka and by other contemporary authors. Maharshi Parasara in his Para,ari Hora gave a chart of lagnasthavarga where total benefic rekhas are 49. But there too no asthavarga of Rahu is found. In later days some eminent astrologers thought of Lagnasthavarga and asthavarga of Rahu. They drew Lagnasthavarga containing 37 benefic rekhas instead of 49. Regarding Rahu's asthavarga there is difference of opinion. Some of them fix 40 benefic rekhas of Rahu-asthavarga others are for 41 benefic rekhas. lo far.aero part of India most of the astrolr>gers of the 19th and early part of 20th centuries prefer 37 benefic rekhas for lagna and 40 for Rahu.
Let  us now explain  in detail the method of putting benefic
,ekhas to avoid confusion.
   Several benefic places as said above are to be reckoned witb respect to lagna rasi and not bhava occupied by each planet in the birth chart.  The places {houses) where rekhas are put are to be understood as benefic and where there is no rekha is to be considered as malefic for that planet.  For each of the 7 planets and lagoa 8 times are to be counted to ascertain beoefic and malefic houses. Maximum rekhas in a house would be 8 in number and malefic biodus also can not exceed 8.
   Regarding putting rekhas (or small vertical lines) there are different processes in different parts of the country.
   For example, in Bengal majority of astrologers::give vertical 1trokes which are considered as beoefic, where there is no such stroke they put bindus in that house.
   Say, Ravi is in Mesa. · From Ravi benefic rekhas will be put in the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th houses and in the 3rd, 5th, 6th and 12th houses there will be malefic bindus only.
In this way if a house contain 6 rekhas and 2 bindus we shall

ASTHAVARGA SYSTEM	325

deduce that transit-Ravi while passing through that house will give ! favourable result.
   Again, if a house contain 4 benefic rekhas there will be 4 malefic bindus in that house and the result will be neutral.
   If malefic bindus are more in number than benefic rekhas the planet while traversing through that house give unfavourable result.
Mabastbavarga
   Draw a separate chart. Now add the number of benefic rekhas of the seven pl&nets of each rasi and put the total figure in the same rasi of which benefic rekhas of all the seven planets are summed up.
Let us explain the method in detail.
   We may say that number of benefic rekhas in Mesa rasi of seven planets are to be added and the total figure thus found is to be put in Mesa rasi of Mahasthavarga chart. In this manner all the benefic rekhas of all rasis of seven planets' asthavarga charts are to be added and to be put in respective rasis in the Mahasthavarga chakra (or chart).

Asthavarga ch,kr•
  ( Number of rekhas in each rasi of all planets are shown below: ) Draw a birth chart of the boy who was born on the 30th April, 1953 at 10 A.M. (L.M.T.) in Calcutta (Seep.69). We have not drawn separately birth chart and asthavarga chakras of 7 planets but indicate	positions of	lagna	and	planets for convenience of our readers.  The number of auspicious rekhas in
each rasi also is shown in the following diagram.
   Birth chart-Laana in Mithune, Ravi in Mesa. Chandra ia Tula, Mangat and Vrhaspathi in Vrsa, Budha and Sukra in Mina, Sani in Kanya, Rahu in Makar and Ketu in Karkata.
   If we look in10 the diagram of Mahasthavarsa we find that sum of auspicious rekhas of all the 7 planets for Mesa rasi is 25, Vrsa rasi contains 29, Mithune 26 (where bgna rises), Karkata 29 etc.
   Now add the figures received by Mina, Mesa, Vrsa ancf Mithune; again, the figures in Karkata, Simha, Kanya and Tula

HINDU BGll!NOB OP THI! PUTURI!

and lastly figures in Vrscika, Dhanu, Makar and Kumbha. All these group-numbers are to be added. The first group indicates first part of life, the second group the middle part and the third group indicates the old or last part of life.
Diagram of Asthanrga rekhas















Mabasthavarga chakra

BhavaNumber of/ Bekhas
!16
29
32
20
22
33
29
32
30
35
25
29Baal

M:Uhune Karkata Sim.ha Kanya Tuls Vrscika
Dhanu
Makar Xumbha Mina MeS&
VraaLagna2nd3rdilh6th6th7th8th9th10th11th12ohIn the present case it will be seen that-
Thefirst group from Mina to Mithune, total benefic rekhas­ Mina 35+Mesa 25+Vrsa 29+Mithune 26=115
The second or middle part, bencfic ri:khas-
Karkata 29+Simha 32+Kanya 20+Tula 22=103

ASTHAVAROA SYSTBM	327

The old or last part, benefic rekhas-
Vrscika 33+Dhanu 29+Makar 32+Kumbha 30,,.124
   The standard figure is 100, which means, that part of life will remain normal, the figure above 100 and below 120 indicates better part of life and if the figure is above 120 it will indicate best period.
We see that the last part of the native has fairly good total of
124 which means that the native will enjoy happy life in this part. The first part of life will be fairly good and the middle part of life is tolerably good.
Next thing to judge from Mahasthavarga  chart is to see
whether there is any dhanayoga, and worries and anxieties.
   1. If the figures in 6th, 8th and 12th houses from lagna-rasi are more than those in lagna-rasi the native shall have to face very many obstacles in his career or day-to-day life and also suffer from worries and anxieties.
2. If the fiaures in any two malefic places (6th, 8th and 12th)
from lagna rasi are more than those of lagna the native may find respite occasionally ; if one place out of these three malefic houses arc effected due to more figure than lagna-rasi the native 1nay have to encounter some troubles relating to that house but he shall be able to pass over the difficulties after a short while.
   3. If these malefic houses contain less number of auspicious tekhas than that of lagna-rasi the native shall have chance of enjoying an easy-going life.
   4. Find the total figures in rasis where Sani, Mangat and Rahn are.situated, the native may fall ill and suffer from worries and anxieties at those ages.
These effects are to be judged from Mahasthavarga chakra.
From uthanrga chakra :-
   5. In nsthavarga chakra of Sani-Add together the auspicious rekhas from Sani to Jagna and !agna to Sani. we find two figures and also the sum of these two figures. These three figures will represent the ages at which the native shall have bad period. Of course if the dasa and antardasas are favourable the ages may not be so unfavourable. The unfavourable result will be prominently felt if dasa and antardasa also is unfavourable.
   Ii. Similarly in Mangal's asthavarga, rekhas from Mangal to Iagna and lagna to Mangat are to be added and also the sum of

128	HINDU SOIBNCB OF TIIB FOTORB

these two figures are to be determined. These ages aho will be unfavourable if dasa and antardasa arc not favourable.
   7. We may ascertain favourable periods also from Vrhaspathi and Sukra's asthavarga charts.
The method of working out ,these favourable periods is the
same as Sani and Mangal.
   Thus we shall find the figures indicating ages when the native will get favourable result in many respects provided dasa and antardasa arc favourable. If dasa and antardasa arc otherwise these ages may not be as good as it should be.
The same process is applicable in case of Sukra.
  Jn short, good periods may be ascertained from Vrhaspatbi and Sukra's asthavarga and unfavourable periods from asthavarga chakras of Sani and Mangal.
8. To determine dhana yoga :-
   In the Mahasthavarga chakra if the total figure in the 11th house is more than the figure in the 10th and the figure in the 12th is iess than that of lagna and also of the 11th the native is
,upposed to be financially affluent.
   But this is also to be specifically remembered that no favourable or unfavourable yogas will have aerious influence on the native if they are not supported by similar yogaa in the birthchart. As for example, if we find dhana yoga in Mahastbavarga chakra but the birthchart shows signs of serious poverty the dhanayoga in the Mahasthavarga chakra will have no influence on the native.
   9. In Mahasthavarga-Add together the figures in rasis where Sani, Mangat and Rahu arc posited. The figure thus. obtained may be reduced by subtracting multiples of 12 and 27. The resultant number will indicate the age, The period at those ages may prove very bad for the native if the dasa and antardasa arc also unfavourable.
   There is another method of finding out periods of childhood, youth and old enumerated by renowned author Kalyanvarma in his Sa,a,ally an authoritative book on astrology. He also narrated a different process to determine yogas of wealth aad poverty. We shall explain both the methods in the next paragraphs.

ASTHAVARGA SYSTEM	329
   (i) Add together the figure of the Mahasthavarga chakra in lagna-rasi, the 4th, 7th, and 10th from lagna-rasi.
   The sum of those figures will represent the first part of life or early stage of life.
(ii) Sum of the  figures in the 2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th will
stand for middle part or young stage of life.
(iii) Add together the figures in the 3rd, 6th, 91h and 12th.
The sum thus obtained will represent the old stage of life.
   That part of life which has the maximum number of auspicious rckhas shall be happier than the other two.
  (iv) To determine the wealth giving yoga or yoga of poverty the author's method is as follows :
In Mahasthavarga chakra-
   Add together the figures in the (i) !st (lagnarasi), 5th and the 9th (ii) the 2nd, 6th and the 10th, (iii) the 3rd, 7th and the 11th,
(iv) the 4th, 8th and the 12th reckoned from lagnarasi.
   If there arc more auspicious rekhas in the 3rd group than the 4th group indication is that the native shall be rich. Otherwise, he shall be poor. Nothing has been said about the first and the second group.
   When a planet transits through a rasi (see Mahasthavarga chakra) containing 30 auspicious rekhas or more the planet will be favourable for the native; if the figure is less than 30 and more than 25 the planet will be neutral and if the figure is less than 25 the planet in question will give unfavourable result.

Gocbarphala or resnlts of transits of planets in different houses
   Planets as we said earlier are moving constantly through various rasis and during such movement which we term as transit or gochar they produce some good or bad effect according to their ownershiJ'), position and relation with other benefic or malefic planets in the birth chart.
   Transit-results are very important and should not be ignored. Transits of planets modify bcnefic or malefic results of dasa and antardasa. When we are to consider good or bad effect of transit of a planet it is the position of the radical Moon or Janmarasi from which such transit is to be considered though modern astrologers do not ignore lagna at the time of making any

330,	I!INDU BOIENOE OF' TI!!! FUTURE

prophecy about such planetary transit. But shastric directions are always to count houses from Janmarasi.
   Let us explain the above contention more elaborately by an example. In the standard horoscope of the boy born on the 30th April 1953 we find that lagna is in Mithune and Chandra (i.e. Janmarasi or radical Moon) is in Tula. If we are to consider the results of transits of Vrhaspathi and Sani at the time of writing this chapter in October, 1978 we find Sani in the 11th and Vrhaspathi in the 10th place from Janmarasi and Sani is situated in the 3rd and Vrhaspathi is in the 2nd place reckoned from lagna. Sani being in the 11th place from Janmarasi will produce favourable result and Vrhaspathi in the 10th place from radical moon will give unfavourable result. On the other hand both the planets will give good result from lagna. Authoritative pundits have totally ignored lagna in reference to gochar and we too shall deal in gochar results from Janmarasi only.

Gocbarpbala of Ravi
   Ravi is favourable while transiting through 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th houses from Janmarasi. lo other places he will produce bad results.
   !. Ravi in the !st house-Ill health due to blood pressure, heart trouble, fatigue, nervous ailment, loss of money and prestige, eye disease, obstacles in all enterprises, fear and anxiety, misunderstanding with authorities etc.
2. In the 2nd house-loss of money, quarrel with friends and
relatives, financial set..back, worries and anxieties, unsuccess etc.
   3. In the 3rd house-good health, comforts in family ·life, appreciation by higher authorities or recognition by superiors, gain of wealth, new position and status, courage etc.
   4. In the 4th house-domestic troubles and unhappiness, financial difficulties, dispute with friends and relatives, trouble in conjugal life etc,
   5. In tb.e 5th house-loss of mental peace, anxieties due to inimical activities of some one, accidents, bad health of the native and his children, strained relation with authorities or superiors and men in power, separation from relatives etc.
6. In the 6th house-success in all undertakings, cheerfulness,

ASTHA VAI\GA SYSTEM	331
good health, good earning, happiness, enemies of the native will be subdued.
   7. In the 7th house-the native will be unhappy owing to misunderstanding with his wife, bad health due to indigestion, disease of the intestine and anus, dysentery, fear, fatigue owing to nervous strain, depression of mind, humiliation, worries and anxieties etc.
   8. In the 8th house-bad company, high blood pressure, displeasure from the king of the land, administrative head or superiors, quarrel with friends, irritable temperament, bad health of wife etc.
  9. In the 9th house-bad luck, disappointment, loss of status, enmity with elders, humiliation, sickness etc.
  10. In the 10th house-fulfillment of desire, restoration of lost position, gain of money, the native may be benefited by persons of high social standing etc.
   II. In the 11th house-Ravi while moving through the I Ith house from Janmarasi will confer on the native good and respectable position, honour, wealth, success and predominance over others etc.
  12, In the 12th house-Ill health, sorrow, loss of money, wcuisomc travelling, unnecessary expenditure, quarrel with friends etc.
Ravi  while  passing  through  first 10° degrees of rasi will
produce result.
Gocharphala of Chandra
   Chandra produces beneficial results while passing through 1st, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 10th and 11th houses from Janmarasi. In other places Chandra is unfavourable. While undertaking new work or journey for a new place we generally consult the Almanac to see whether Chandra-suddbi of the person is there, this means that whether gocharphala of Chandra is favourable or not. Older generation obeyed strictly this shastric direction. They did not do any new work or would not go out of their residence to attend an appointment if Chandra and Ravi-suddhies are n.ot available in the Panchanga (Almanac). But now-a-days life is so cumbrous and we are so busy that in order to cope with speed of the•yuga (age) we must be alert and cannot lose a moment to wait for

332	HINDU SCIENCE OF '.rHB FU'.rURB
Chandra or Ravi-suddhi. Hence modern young men cry down this belief and term this habit of old men as nonsense.
   I. In the 1st house-Excellent food, bedroom comforts, sexual enjoyments, good fortunes, meeting with friends, gain of money etc.
2. In the 2nd house-Loss of prestige and wealth, dispute and
uosuccess.
   3. In the 3rd house-The native shall get wealth, good dress, women, joy and happiness etc.
4. In  the  4th  house--Loss  of  mental  peace, domestic
unhappiness, troubles, sorrows etc.
   5. In the 5th house-Indigestion, mental worries, despair, obstacles in undertakings, loss of money, humiliation etc.
   6. lo the 6th house-The native enjoys wealth and good health ; he acquires friendship with good men and is happy etc.
   7. In the 7th house-Good friends, bedroom comforts, sexual enjoyments, good food and dress, gain of conveyances, honour, gain of money and happiness, short journey etc.
   8. In the 8th house-Misery, ill health, quarrel, anxiety, bronchial troubles etc.
   9. In the 9th house-Fatigue and general debility, pain in the chest, mental agony, unwanted expenditure, loss of prestige and money etc.
   JO. In the 10th house-success, happiness and home comforts etc.
   11. In the 11th house-The native shall enjoy prosperity, good health, money and company of new friends.
   12. In the 12th house-Loss of money, injury, accident, unexpected expenditure, laziness, misunderstanding with friends and relatives.
Chandra will produce Gocharphala daily.

Gocharphala of Mangal
   Maogal produces good results while passing through the 3rd, 6th and 11th houses from Janmarasi. In other houses he is unfavourable,
   1. In the 1st house-accident through fire, poison or weapons, disease of bile, blood or heat, hepatic ailments, colic pain, piles or

ASTHAVARGA SYSTEM	333
fissure, low vitality, fatigue, loss of money, the native may incur displeasure of superiors, obstacles in undertakings etc.
   2. In the 2nd house-loss of money, harsh speech and dealing, fear from enemies and thieves, bad temper, disgrace, to incur displeasure of Government, anxicty,bilious and windy disease etc.
   3. In the 3rd house-increase of vitality and energy, good health and strength, success in all endeavours, gain of position and money etc.
   4. In the 4th house-mental agony, domestic unhappiness, disease of fever, indigestion and dysentery, loss of mental peace owing to hostile activities of relatives. The native may be cheated by some of his friends and incur monetary loss.
   S. In the 5th house-quarrel with kith and kin and sons, serious illness-even death of a son, theft in t11e house, obstacles in performing religious deeds, disease of indigestion, dysentery, physical weakness etc.
   6. In the 6th house-enemies may be vanquished, success in litigation and all undertakings, good earnings, good health etc.
   7; In the 7th house-unhealthy atmosphere in the family, bad health of wife, or quarrel with her, mental agony, indigestion. stomach•ache. unnecessary travelling, loss of money etc.
   8. In the 8th house-accident, serious illness, poisoning, wounds, litigation, loss of blood, anaemia, loss of money and mental peace etc.
  9. In. the 9th house-bad luck. loss of money, troublesome journey, humiliation, loss of vitality, mental anxiety etc.
   IO. In the 10th house-great trouble in vocational or professional sphere, misbehaviour. failure in endeavours, loss of money, ill health of any superior person etc.
   11. In the 11th house-financial prospect, acquisition of landed property, success in undertakings, family peace, good health etc.
   12. In the 12th house-disease in anus, hepatic ailments, eye troubles, unwanted expenses, mental worries, quarrel with wife and friends etc.
   Mangal produces results when he passes through the first 10° degrees of a rasi,

Gocharpbala of Budha
   Budha produces favourable results in the 2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th and 11th houses from Janmarasi and he will be unfavourable in other places.
   1. In the 1st house-unsteady mind, dull intellect, unmannerly attitude arid speech that creates enemies,. friendship with !ow and mean people, loss of money in journey, obstacle in academic career etc.
   2, In the 2nd house-good results in financial and professional undertakings but be (the planet) causes disgrace, dishonour, scandal and misery when pass • through the 2nd house.
   3. In the 3rd house-hostility with relatives, gain of new friends and destruction of enemies, troubles from Government and superiors etc.
  4. In the 4th house-indication of good health, gain of money, honour and happiness, prosperity to relatives, domestic tranquillity, gain of good friends etc.
   5. In the 5th house-bad relation with son, dull intellect, bad luck, loss of money and position etc.
  6. In the 6th house-gain of position, status and popularity, prosperity, success, appreciation of native's efficiency by others etc.
   7. In the 7th house-health may be run down due to attack of various diseases, mental worries, loss of money and domestic peace etc.
   8. In the 8th house-gain of money through various sources, victory over enemies and other obstacles,.cheerfulness,skill and intellect etc.
   9. In the 9th house-obstacles in undertakings, loss of money and position etc.
   10. In the 10th house-vocational success, domestic happiness, victory over enemies, prosperity etc.
   11. In the 11th house-gain of money, happy conjugal life, gain of good friends, prosperity etc.
   12. In the 12th :i,.ouse-domestic unhappiness, loss of money, enemies may create serious troubles, the native may court disgrace etc.

Gocbarpbala of Vrbaspatbi
   Of the sl.:>w moving planets Vrhaspathi's.function in transit is very important. He is favourable in the 2nd, 5th, 7th, 9th ·and 11th houses from Janmarasi and in other places he is unfavourable.
   1. In the 1st house-bad health, loss of wealth, heavy expenditure, domestic worries, bad relation with relatives etc.
   2. In the 2nd house-good earning, gain of wealth, success in all enterprises, birth of a son, prosperity, promotion of service, gain of popularity etc.
3. In  the  3rd  house-loss of  mental  peace, failure in
undertaking, loss of friends and position, family_discomfort etc.
   4. In the 4th house-loss of domestic peace, worries and anxieties, loss of money, quarrel with friends etc.
   5. In the 5th house-This is a very auspicious house for Vrhaspathi. The nlltive's efficiency may be highly appreciated by authorities, he will be honoured by others. Monetary gain, ceremonies at home, may visit holy places, may meet with honest and pious men, he may be initiated.
_ 6. In the 6th house-unsuccess in undertakings, quarrel with relatives, inimical activities of some one, loss of money etc.
   7. In the 7th house-happy conjugal life, sexual pleasure, marriage, .financial gain, prosperity, knowledge, interest in new sul,jects etc.
   8. In the 8th house-ill health, change of residence, transfer to unwanted place, liver trouble, fatigue, loss of money, dishonour, anxieties etc.
   9. In the 9th house-good luck, prosperity, efficiency, promotion in service career, popularity, happiness at home, acquisition of landed property etc.
   10. In the 10th house-loss of status, demotion in service career, may incur the displeasure of superiors, loss of money and prestige, scandle, domestic trouble, death of dear and near one, dispute about landed property etc.
   11. In the 11th house-gain of money and luxurious articles, marriage, birth of a son, prosperity, respectful positio, ngood health etc.

336	HINDU SCIENCE OP THE PUTURE
   12, In the 12th house-heavy expenditure, wearisome journey, anxiety, loss of money and property, bad health, loss of domestic peace etc.
Gocbarpbla of Sukra
   Sukra is favourable in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th houses from Janmarasi and in other places she is unfavourable.
   1. In the 1st house-good academic career, gain of status, happy conjugal life, good dress, development of artistic talent, gain of articles of luxury etc.
   2. In the 2nd house-domestic happiness, marriage, prosperity, increased wealth,"gains etc.
   3. In the 3rd house-energetic approach to all endeavours, 1uccess, gain of position, power and prestige, good friends, he may pass through pleasurable days, happy married life etc.
   4. In the 4th house-uplift of vocationll career, good gain through agricultural pursuits, pleasure trips, gain of wealth, domestic tranquillity etc.
   5. In the 5th house-defeat of enemy, efficiency, meritorious works to be appreciated by superiors and gain of b:,noms from them, sympathies from friends, virtuous deeds, name and fame, cordial relation with friends and relatives etc.
6. In  the 6th  house-unfavourable results such as disgrace,
debts, quarrels, litigation, financial loss, anxieties etc.
   7. In the 7th house-domestic unhappiness, scandal, association with women of ill repute, ill health of or misunder­ standing with wife, loss of money etc.
   8. In the 8th house-good health, acquisition of land, building an excelfont house of his own, gain of wealth, or honour, and prosperity etc.
   9, In the 9th house-gain of luxury-articles, respect from elders, gain of knowledge, fame and prosperity etc.
   10. In the 10th house-good professional career, respect from friends but defeat in litigation, disgrace, .;iuarrel with elders etc.
   11. In the 11th house-gain of money, prosperity, friendship with opposite sex, mental peace, domestic peace and happiness etc.

ASTHAVARGA SYSTEM & GOCHARPHALA	337
   12. In the 12th house-enjoyment, gain of luxury-goods, unnecessary expenditure, indulgence in sensual pleasures etc.
Gocharpbala of Sanl
   Sani during his transit is beneficial when he passes through 3rd,6th and !Ith houses. Other houses are unfavourable for him. Sani in transit is very unfavourable in the 7th, 8th and 12th houses from radical moon. He is •Randhra-gata" when he is in the 8th house from Janmarasi, "Randhra"· means 8th place or Mrityu-sthana or house of death. Even a lay man becomes panicky when he hears of 'Randhra-gata' Sani in his birth chart.
   1. In the Isl house-bad health, bereavement, change of place, separation from one's own men, miseries;failure in every endeavour, loss of money, mental worries etc.
   2. In the 2nd house-loss of money, quarrel with relatives, financial stringency, heavy expenditure, loss of money and prestige owing to deception committed by notoriou persons, ill health, loss of mental peace, unhappy conjugal life etc.
   3. In the 3rd house-native's anxiety over question of availability of a good servant may be solved, he shall be able to do his duties more energetically and actively and shall be successful in his endeavour if dasa and antardasa donot stand in the way, he shall be able to exert his influence over many, paticularly his subordinates, shall be able to secure his position and status. 3rd house is a upa hayasthana, malefic planets in transit or in a radical chart will act favourably when they pass through or is situated in any of the upachayasthanas.
4. In  the 4th  house-the  native sh0all  be deprived of  the
company of good friends, rather shall associate with wicked men, shall fall in the trap of cheats and shall lose both money and prestige, domestic unhappiness, bad health of mother etc.
   5. In the 5th house-loss of children, bad health due to indigestion or any other similar ailment, misjudgment, misapplication of intelligence, Joss of money and may hav to face trouble for that, separation from family, obstacle i11 performing religious deeds etc.
   6,  In the 6th house-this is also a upachayasthana. Sani in transit is considered to produce favourable results in respect of health, wealth and profession, success, defeat of enemies etc.
22

338	HINDU SOIIINOII OP THII FUTURE
   7. In the 7th house-loss of money in business sector, may incur displeasure of superiors, or of authorities, domestic troubles, bad health of wife and also of himself, obstacle and hindrance in every affair, tedious journey, fatigue etc.
   8. In the 8th house-Sani is very unfavourable in the 8th house. Litigation, grief, most unhappy conjugal life due to either separation from or ill health of life partner, death or serious illness of children, intense miseries, loss of money owing to association with wicked men, gambling etc.
  9. In the 9th house-tedious journey, enmity, loss of money, sorrow and unhappiness, ill health etc.
   IO. In the 10th house-Though 10th house also is one of the 'upachayasthanas' Sani will exert his evil influence in some respects when he passes through this house.
   Favourable influences are-prosperity, success in new enterprises, unemployed will get employment or those who arc already in service may get promotion.
   Unfavourable results are-loss of money and accumulated wealth, loss of prestige, the native may indulge in sinful deeds etc.
   II. In the !Ith house-This i• also a 'upachayasthana' and it is a favourable place for Sani.
   Results are-gain of money, increased income, name and fame, happy relation with friends and relatives, good status etc.
   12. In the 12th house-very bad house for Sani. Results are sama as his passage through the 7th and 8th houses, only thing to be noted particularly is that there may be series of unhappy incidents in the family, unwanted heavy expenditure, loss of money due to theft or burglary, loss of mental peace.
   It is needless to repeat that the transit of Sani through the 12th, !st and thd 2nd houses from Janmarasi is very unfavourable. The movement of Sani through these three houses is termed as Sani"s 'Sade Sathi' which means. that Sani takes 7! years to cover these fateful three rasis from the 12th to 2nd houses from radical
moon-as Sani takes on an average 21/4 years to complete his pllSsage through one rasi._
   Experienced astrologers of eminence have termed Sani's 'Sade Sathi' as producing notoriously evil results. Generally thia 'Sade Sathi' may occur three times in a man's life. In the first

ASTHAVARGA SYSTEM & GOCHARPBALA	339

cycle the native is young in age and evil .effects produced by 'Sade Sathi' may not do much harm to the native but malefic effects may be felt by his parents and their domestic environment may not remain healthy and comfortable. In the second term of 'Sade Sathi' the native is supposed to be a middle aged person and the effect of the 2nd cyclo will be very malicious with regard to his health, financial condition and professional career.
   In the third term the native shall attain about 90 years of age. Very few persons live upto that age. However, during the tenure of third cycle of Sani's 'Sade Sathi' the native suffers from serious illness, worries and anxieties, this may even cause death of the native.
   If the dasa and antardasa running at the time of 'Sade Sathi' happen to be favourable and Sani in the birth chart is well­ disposed evil results due to 'Sade Sathi' may be negligible.
   Another very important point to be noted is that if the dasa and antardasa are favourable and Sani transits through a rasi where malefic bindus in asthavarga chart are more than benefic rekhas the native may suffer from miseries and other malefic effects in spite of favourable dasa and antardasa.
Gocharphala of Raho and Ket&
   Generally astrologers are of opinion that Rahu will produce the results similar to Sani and Ketu's results are similar to Mangal. But Rahu's transit in the 10th house from Janmarasi brings forth financial gain abundantly for the native.
A few general rules of application of gocbarpbala of planets
   We have so long dealt with results of transft of planets in different houses from Janmarasi. But we should not forget that along with the transit of planets indication of planets' capability to impart bencfic or malefic results according to the natal chart are to be taken note of. As for example a natural malefic planet's transit to a upachayasthana from Janmarasi may cause monetary gain but if the natal chart has very ominous signs so far the native's financial conditions are concerned he may not get the benefit of monetary gain in spite of good transit of a particular planet or planets. Similarly if the transit of a planet speaks of very unfavourable result but the. planet in question is powerful

340	HINDU SOIENO& OF TH& FUTURE

and well disposed in the ,natal chart and the rasi through which the planet passes has contained more benefic rekhas in asthavarga chart the results of that planet in spite of unfavourable transit will not be evil.
   I. If a planet's sojourn to a malefic house from Janmarasi happens to be his exalted, mooltrikone, own or friendly sign the planet will not produce very bad result, rather effects will be mildest, milder or mild.
   2. If the transiting planet be favourable in the birth chart and the house (where he transits) from Janmarbsi also be benefic such transit will prove beneficial provided in the asthavarga chart of that planet that rasi contains benefic rekhas at least more than 4.
   (i} If that planet transits to his inimical rasi or the house of depression the result will not be favourable.
   3. Again, if the planet by ownership or position in the birth­ chart is malefic he will not be able to yield favourable result in spite of his transit lo a favourable house from Janmarasi. Of course if in the asthavarga chart the planet contains more benefic rekhas the unfavourable result will be minimum.
   4. If a natural benefic transits to a favourable house from Janmarasi and at the same time is in retrograde motion in that house his good results will be very effective. Here also the asthavarga chakra of that planet should be consulted. If the planet receives more benefic rekhas in that rasi the aforesaid maximum good result may be expected.
   (i) If the planet is a I natural benefic but transits to an unfavourable house and at the same time he is in retrograde motion malefic results will be minimum.
   5. If a natural malefic after transiting to a favourable house bein retrogrado m>tion the beneficial results will be reduced to minimum or to nil, and if a malefic planet transits to an unfavourable house and be retrograde the unfavourable results will be intensified.
6. When dasa and antardasa of benefic planets run and the
planet moves to a favourable house the results of transit will be
very much favourable, whereas if the  planet  transits  to an

ASTBAYARGA SYSTEM & GOCBARPHALA	341

unfavourable house the favourable results of dasa and antardasa will be reduced.
7. Wben a planet is combust (or obstructed by Ravi's rays
or eclipsed) he cannot produce any good result in spite of his transit to a favourable house from Janruarasi.
8. Similarly unfavourable results of transit of a planet even
through a favourable house will be produced if the planet is hemmed in between two maldics. If the rasi where the planet moves contains more than 4 benefic rekb;,s in asthavarga chakra minimum good result will be felt.
   (i) Reverse will be the result if the planet is situated between two benefics.
9. If a planet  transits  through  a  benefic  house  which
contains more than 4 auspicious rekhas and the 4th, 5th or 9th place from that planet is occupied by a benefic the maximum favourable results will be produced but if the house where the planet transits contains less than 4 rekbas fairly good result may be felt by the native under similar condition provided the planet transits through his own, exalted or friendly house, otherwise no good or bad result may be expected.
10. Special points to be noted-
   A transiting planet can not give any result if the Vedasthana is posited by any other planet.
   From the table in the next page it is· clear that number of Vedasthanas of a planet from natal Chandra is exactly the same as the nuinber of favourable places of that planet.
   For example-transiting Ravi is favourable in the 3rd place (house) from Janmarasi (or natal Chandra) the corresponding Vedaothana is the 9th place from Janmarasi. This means when Ravi transits through the 3rd place from Janmarasi and at the same time another planet passes through the 9th house from Janmarasi Ravi's good effect due to fav,ourable transit will be checked or nullified. Therefore a planet's favourable transit will be ineffective if any other planet passes through the correspond-
• ing Vedasthana of that planet. Again if a planet moves to an unfavourable place from natal Chandra (or Janmarasi) and the corresponding favourable house of that planet is occupied by any other planet the effect of unfavourable transit will be checked or nullified.

342	HINDU BOIBNOB 01" THE FUTURE
   For instance, Ravi's movement to the 9th place from Janmarasi is inauspicious if at that time any other planet transits through the 3rd house from natal Chandra Ravi's bad effect is checked.  This reverse rule is applicable in case of all planets.
   But there is a special rule with regard to Ravi and Sani, Budha and Chandra. This means if Ravi and Sani mutually move to their respective Vedasthanas their effects during favourable or unfavourable transits will not be checked. Similar is the case with Bud Ila and Chandra.
   In the following table corresponding Vedasthana of each planet is shown.

R..vi
Ben!ftc p!ac,s	Oorre91'onding from Mtai Chandra,  Vedasthana 3rd houae		9th house
6th house	l th hoo.se
10th house	4th house
lltl house	1st houseVrhaspathi
Bem.ftc place.	Oorrespondtng from ,ia.tai Chandra  Veda,thaM 2nd houae		12th house
5th bOUH	4th heuse
Tth house	3rd houae
9th hcm e	10th house
11th house	8th houaeChandraSukralat house5th bouaelat heuse8th houHSrd house
6th houae9th house
19th houae!nd house
SM house7th house
lat hou¦e7th bonse2nd houfl'e4th house10th house10th house
11th h•)UH!&th ho se
8th house5th house
8th house9th h:uae
5th bOUBIMangat
rd house	12th house
6th house	9th house
11th houee	f:ith hon1e
Budha
gnd house	5th house
4th houee	Srd house
6th honee	9th house
8th house	let house
10th houae	'1th hOUl'e
11th house	12th houee9th house	11th house
10th house	6th houee
12th house	3rd bonae


Sani
8Td house	12"1 hons
6th houtle	9th bouH
11th house	5th house   A separate book is re_quired if we are to deal with this subject only from all aspects of transits. Inquisitive readers may take help of other authoritative treatise on this subject-particularly Tajik Ni/kanthi.

CHAPTER XVI

DISEASES
  There are innumer ble yogas of diseases in authoritative books on astrology. It is hardly possible to quote all of them in a book of this size for want of space. I however mention a few very important yogas of diseases from which generally men of tropical countries suffer. This is also to be noted that not all the yogas are found in toto in a birth chan. It rests with the astrologer to understand the inner meaning of yogas and explain them according to his own ability and experience. As for instance, general dictum is that Sani together with Mangal when placed in the 7th or the 3th place from lagna the husband or the wife as the case may be may die a premature death. It may so happen that Sani and Mangat together are not posited in the 7th or 8th place from lagna but Sani in the 8th place is aspected by Mangat, or the 7th lord either Sani or Mangal is situated in any other unfavourable bhava. From such placement of these two unfavourable planets in any malefic bhava or their relation with the 7th lord it may be construed that the conditions of the malefic yoga are fulfilled and the unfavourable results contemplated by astrological pundits may happen.
  This is the way how majority of favourable or unfavourable yogas are explained.
  Blindness : I. If the 4th or 5th bhava is associated with malefics, over and above Chandra specially occupies 6th, 8th or 12th house t'1e native becomes blind.
   But 1f the owners of these bhavas and Chandra are conjoined with or aspected by benefics the result will not be unfavourable.
   2. The native will be blind from his very birth if Ravi and Chandra being in Simha lagna are aspected by Sani and Mangal. If lagna receives the aspect of any benefic the native'• eyes will be fu!J. ofbubbles, consequently he shall not be able to see anythinr.
In Brihat-jataka it is stated that Ravi, Chandra, Sani and
Mangal cause blindness if they are related to each other in any

344	BINDU SCIENCE OF THE PUTURE
way-particularly if these planets are situated in the 2nd, 6th 8th and 12fo houses this inauspicious result may happen.
   Commentator Bhattapal is of opinion that when lagna rises at Sin1harasi and Ravi is there and there is full aspect of Sani and Mangal on lagna and Ravi the native will be blind of right eye and if only Chandra in that lagna is aspected by aforesaid malefic planets the native will be blind of left eye.
   3. The native loses his eyesight if the 6th or 8th place is occupied by a malefic, Unfavourable planets in the 6th house cause blindness of the left eye and if the 8th house is occupied by a malefic sight of right eye will be lost.
   4. When Ravi is posited in lagna or the 7th place from lagna and is aspected by or conjoined with Sani the native at a ver>' early age loses the sight of the right ye, and if such ill disposed Ravi is in the company lf only Rahu and Mangat the native becomes blind of left eye
   5. If malefic planell be placed in the 6th, 8th or 12th places and Ravi being one of them be situated in the 12th and Chandra is in the 6th place the native loses his left eye. Again, if Ravi be in the 8th place instead of the 12th the native loses his right eye.
   6. The native will be blind when Mangal owns the 2nd house, the 8th house is occupied by Ravi and Chandra, and Sani be either in the 6th or 12th house from lagna. ·
The sloka is quoted from Jataka Raina :
   (i) This is also a yoga of blindness if Chandra be in any one of the houses of 6th, 8th or 12th and Sani and Mangat are combined with each other.
7. When lords of  the 2nd, 5th, 7th and 9th places are i::i
dusthanas and Sukra is in lagna the native becomes blind.
   8. If Chandra is in the 6th, Ravi in the 8th, Sani in the 12th and Mangal is situated in the 2nd place even Indra, the king of heaven cannot escape the result of this unfavourable yoga of blindness.
9,  If the lord of the 2nd house in  conjunction  with the lord
oflagna be situated in any dusthana the native loses his eye sight.
   10. When lagnapath·i, Ravi and Sukra together are posited in any bhava particularly in any dusthana the native will be blind from his very birth.

DISEASES	345
   If these planets gain strength on account of their position in the houses of exaltation or own house unfavourable result stated above in some cases do not happen.
   If these unfavourable yogakaraka plauecs are associated witb the lords of the 9th, 4th or 3rd houses malefic results will be effective in cases of father, mother, brother or sister respectively.
The following yogas are quoted from Sarvartha Chintamony :
  11. When lagnapathi and dhanapathi (2nd Lord) together be placed in any dusthana the native becomes blind.
   12. The native becomes blind from his very birth if Ravi, Sukra and lagnapathi in combination with the lord of the 2nd place are posited in any dusthana.
B.  Jatakalankar says that if the 6th, 8th or 12th place is
occupied by Ravi and Sukra the native will be born blind and if any bhava lord is associated with these two planets the malefic result of blindness will effect them indicated by those bhavas i.e. say the 9th lord is associated with these malefic yogakaraka planets the father will be blind, if it is the 4th lord conjoined with those malefic yogakarakas the mother will be blind etc.
!+. In case of a few yogas of blindness the following points
are to be noted :
   (i) Mangal being in the 12th will effect the left eye, and if Sani be in the 12th it is the right eye that will be lost.
   According to Phaladipika Ravi and Mangal are significators of eyesight. Ravi and the 2nd house indicate right eye and C!!andra as well as the 12th house indicate left ey .
   15. Yoga of loss of one eye: When of the two planets, Ravi and Chandra one is in the 12th and the other in the 6th the native. will be an one eyed person. Unfortunate coincidence is that bis wife too will also be one eyed.
  16. Yoga of nlgbt blindness: If in a birthchart Chandra and Sukra together occupy the 6th, 8th or 12th house the native may be blind at night.
17. In c se of Tula lagna if Ravi in combination with a
malefic is posited in lagna the native will  be blind at  night and
be poor.
   18, If the lord of the 2nd house conjoined with Sukra, and Chandra is situated in lngna it is a yoga of night  blindness, but

346	HINDU BOIENOE OF THE FUTURE
if the 2nd lord is exalted or combined with a benefic the yoga of night blindness is nullified.
   19. If the lord of lagna, Ravi and Sukra are situated in invisible part of the birthchart .the native's eyesight will be weak. (From the 2nd bbava upto the 7th bbava is the invisible part
of birthchart. )
20. These are also the yogas of night blindness,
   (i) When lords of lagna and the 2nd house are related to each other, and Ra,.vi and Chandra are combined with Sukra, or
   (ii) Lagnapathi and the lord of the 2nd house are related to each other and they are posited in any of the three houses from the rasi occupied by Sukra and the 2od lord is associated with Ravi and Chandra.
Eye disease:  21.  Ravi iu Simha lagna causes eye disease.
{Jaraka-Parijat)
   22. The native suffers from Eye disease and Tooth trouble under the following configuration of planets, such as,
{i)  Chandra or Rahu is in  the 12th, Srni in the 5th or 9th
house and Ravi occupies the 7th or 8th house from lagna,
   (ii) If those planets are posited in debilitated navamsa rasi of a malefic the native suffers from Eye disease.
23. If  Gulik (Mandi) is posted in the 8th place from lagna
the native has defaced face and weak Eye sight.
   24. In case of Simha lagna even if Ravi is in his exalted house (that is Mesa rasi) and is aspected by Sani and Mangal the native suffers from eye disease.
   25. If Ravi is in Karkata lagna and aspected by Sani and Mangat the native has inflamed eyes.
   26. If lagna is occupied by the lords of the 10th, 6th and 2nd or these planets are situated in the lowest debilitated points and are conjoined with malefics the native loses his eyes due to wrath of the head of the state.
   27. If the lords of dwadasamsa of the lords of 6th and 10th houses conjoined with lords of lagna are posited in any dusthana and are not aspected by any benefic the native suffers from Elye disease.
   Dumbness : 28. If the lord of the 2nd house accompanied by Vrhaspathi is posited in the 8th place from lagna the native

DISBASBS	347
becomes dumb, but if any of those planets (viz., Vrhaspathi and 2nd lord) occupy his own or exalted house -the malefic yoga of dumbness is nullified.
   29. If Chandra is posited in Vrsa rasi and malefic planets are situated in "Riksha Sandhi" the native will be dumb.
  [Riksha Sand hi means the last point of Karkata, Vrscika and Mina rasis.)
   Some commentators are of opinion that as Chandra in Vrsa is strong the yoga will be ineffective if she is not aspected by any unfavourable planet.
   According to Saravali the yoga of dumbness will be ineffective if Chandra is not aspected by all those malefics being in "Riksha Sandhi".
   According to Jataka-Parijat if Chandra is aspected by a benefic the native shall not be dumb in spite of the aspect of those three malefics. Only result will be that the functioning of native's vocal organ may be retarded and he may start speaking at late years of age.
   (i) If Chandra is aspected by two malefics out of the aforesaid three unfavourable planets the native may have indistinct speech or he may pronounce words with break and there   be no ftuency in the manner of talk.
   30. If Vrhaspathi and the lord of the 2nd house be posited in any dusthana the native becomes dumb, when the lord of the bhava indicating father or mother are conjoined with those two planets (Vrhaspatb.i and the 2nd lord) the native's parents will be dumb. (Para•Hora)
   31. If the lord of the 2nd house combined with Budha and Rahu is situate:\ in the 6th place from lagna, the 2nd lord is conjoined with the lord <,f the rasi occupied by Budha and Rahu the native is attacked with any disease of palate and ultimately becomes dumb. ((S. Chintamony)
   32. If the 4th place falls in a cardinal sign or the 4th bhava is associated with "Chara" (swift moving) planet, the 4th lord be in the 6th and the 12th house is occupied by Mangal the native becomes dumb. (Para-Hora)
Deafness or disease of ears : 3rd and 11th houses signify Ears.
Third house indicates right ear and Eleventh house left ear.

348	1IINDU SCIENCE OF THE PUTURE
According to Brihat Jataka froin 5th  and  9th houses one
,hould know about ears and Seventh house signifies teeth.
   33. If malefic planets be posited in 3rd, 11th, 5th and 9th the native will be suffering from disease of cars and be deaf. If those malefics are not aspected by a favourable planet the yoga of deafness will certainly be fruitful. (J. Parijat)
   (i) According to some commentators if Chandra unaspected by any favourable planet be placed in any of those places, (viz., 3rd, 11th, 5th or 9th places) the disease of ears is possible.
   34. If Chandra, Budha, Vrhaspathi aqd Sukra together are posited in any sign (rasi) the native becomes deaf but he will be highly educated, rich and a noted personality.
   35. If waning moon of the dark fortnight occupies lagna there is possibility of deafness. This is also supported by Brihat­ Jataka and Phaladipika.
My father's lagna was in Tula and Chandra was there and
Ravi was in Makar Rasi, at his 70 yrs. of age he was slightly hard of hearing.
  36. If Mangat associated with 'Mandi' (Gulik) is situated in the 3rd house the native suffers from the disease of ears.
   37. When 3rd house is associated with a malefic and is not aspected by any benefic the native becomes deaf.
   In my birthchart the 3rd house is occupied by more than one unfavourable planet. I feel that I, am gradually losing power of hearing but complete loss of power of hearing is not expected as the 3rd lord is very powerful,
Dental disease
   38. If the 7th place is occupied by a malefic and is ·not aspected by any beneficial planet the native has uneven set of teeth and suffers from disease of teeth.
   39. If Chandra or Rahu occupies the 12th, Sani is in any trikona (5th or 9th place) and Ravi is placed in the 7th or 8th house the native suffers from both Tooth and Eye diseases.
   40. If the lord of the rasi where Rahu is situated or Rahn himself along with the lord of the 2nd house occupies any dusthana the native during dasa-antardasa of the lord of the 2nd house suffers from tooth-disease and during the sub-period of Budha under the major period of the 2nd lord (during dasa of

DISEASES	349
the 2nd lord and anta,dasa of Budha) he shall be attacked with any disease of the tongue. (J. Parija,)
   (I) Sarvartha L'himamony supporting the aforesaid yoga has further mentioned that if Budha and Rahli conjoined with the 2nd lord are placed in the 6th place from lagna, or they are combined with lord of the sign (rasi) where Rahu is posited the native suffers from disease of palate during their dasa ,ind antarc!asa.
   Disease of the throat: 41. If the 3rd lord is combined with Bud"a there is possibility of throat-disease, or the native unknowingly may swallow any poisonous thing or drug. That may cause such ailment ir. throat and for want of financial "flluence proper treatment cannot be rendered. (J. Parijat)
   Sarvartha Chintamony another authoritative book on astrology says that disease of the throat is possible only when 3rd lord conjoined with Budba occupies lagna.
   I think the version of Sarvartha Chintamony is more dependable. In my horoscope and also my young r brother's 3rd lords are conjoined with Budha but uptil now no such trouhle is apprehended. I am a grand old man of 75. I have not experienced any such trouble as yet. I have a close friend in whose horoscope the 3rd lord is conjoined with Budha but he has no such experience even at the age of 78.
  42. If any malefic associated with 'Mandi' (Gulika) occupies the 3rd house disease of the throat is possible.
   43. If Chandra being in the 4th place with a malefic occupies that sign and also in Navamsa Chakra the disease of the throat is apprehended.
   44. When both the 2nd lord and Rahu are combined with the 3rd lord the disease of the throat will be very painful.
   45. If Vrhaspathi being in the 8th place is in conjunction with a planet in debilitation such disease is possible.

Asthma or disease of respiratory organ
   46. When Ravi posited in lagna is aspected by Mangat the native may be attacked with asthma. consumption or colic pain.
   47. If Sani being in the 6th place is combined with 'Mandi', aspccted by Ra vi, Mangat and Rahu, and is neither aspected by

350	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
nor associated with any benefic the native may suffer from any kind of phlegmatic disease-such as, asthma or phthisis.
   48. When the 12th place from lagna is occupied by any malefic, 6th place by Chandra, 8th place by Sani and lagnapathi acquires malefic navamsa the native suffers from malignant type of nasal ulcer (ayurvedic term is Pinas).
   49. If Chandra is hemmed in between two malefics and Ravi is posited in the 7th place which falls in makar rasi the native may be attacked with any kind of phlegmatic disease.
   50. If Chandra and Sukra are conjoined with each other or they are posited in the 7th place from each other and also are aspected by any malefic the na:ive suffers from asthma. If these planets are in any watery sign the disease is very painful to the patient.
51. If Mangal associated  with Budha is placed in the 6th
place and be in a malefic navamsa and at the same time Chandra is aspected by Sukra_ the native may be attacked with a very bad type of phlegmatic disease and becomes physica!ly weak and almost crippled.
52. If the  5th lord be in the 2nd or 8th  place or Ravi,
Chandra, Mangal, Vrhaspathi, Sukra and Sani-these six planets together are posited in any house the native suffers from asthma.
   53. If Budha occupies a watery sigu and is aspected by a malefic, or the 2nd place is occupied by Chandra and Rahu the native suffers from asthma.
Phthisis or Consumptive disease
   54. If Ravi and Chandra are situated either in Simha or Karkata rasi it is a yoga of Bone T. B.
   55. When Chandra is posited between two malefics and Sani is situated in the 7th place from lagna the native may suffer from carbuncle, disease of spleen and consumption.
   56, When 'Mandi' is situated in any kendra from the position of Rahu who is posited in the 6th place from lagna the native suffers from Phthisis.
   57. If Chandra is seated between Sani and Mangal'and Ravi is in Makar rasi the native suffers from Phthisis.
   58. If Chandra is in Kanya rasi and is situated between malefic, the native suffers from Haematemesls (Vomiting of blood from the stomach).

DIS!ASES	351
   59. If Chandra is conjoined with Sani, or one is placed in the 7th place from the other and also they ate aspected by malefics the native is attacked with Phthisis.
   60. When Chandra or Vrhaspathi is placed in a watery sign, is aspected by a malefic and is placed in the 8th place from lagna the native suffers from the disease of Consumption.
61. The following yogas canse Phthisls :
   (i) If Man gal is posited in a malefic house, is conjoined with a malefic and is situated in the 8th place from lagna.
(ii) When lord of lagna associated with Sukra is situated in
any dusthana.
   (iii) If Mangat and Rahu are posited in the 4th or 5th place from atmakarakamsa lagna the native may be attacked with Phthisis but the disease may turn very serious if Chandra has full aspect on Mangal and·Rahu.
  (iv) If Mangat has full aspect on Sani particularly when Mangal qwns any dusthana.
   (v) If Ravi and Chandra together are situated in the 6th or 8th house from lagna.
(vi) If atmakarakamsa lagna falls in Dhanu rasi and Chandra
being aspected by Mangat is situated in lilat sign.
 · (vii)• The native is attacked with Phthisis at his 26th year of age if Rahu is in the 6th, Mandi in any kendra from lagna and the lord of lagna is in the 8th place.
   62. If any one of the 2nd, 4th, 5th and 8th houses is occupied by Rahu and Mangal the native may be attacked with Phthisis.
Here is an example :  (i) Birth date : 1908-25th October.• Lagoa in Mithune associated  with Rahu, in the 3rd place
Vrhaspathi and Sukra, in the 4th Mangal, in the 5th Ravi, Chandra and (R) Budha, in the 7th Ketu, and Sani in the 10th house from lagna.
   Here the 6th lord Mangal and the 8th lord Sani are related to each other and from Chandra both the planets are in dusthanas.
Another instance : (ii) Lagoa in Kumbha, Ketu in Mesa, Ravi
and Sukra in Mithune, Budha in Karkata, Mangal in Simha, Chandra and Rabu in Tula, Vrhaspatbi in Vrscika and (R) Sani in Dbanu Rasi.
   Here Jagna is aspected by Sani and also Mangal from the 7th place has full aspect on lagna.

352	HINDU SCIFNCE OF rHE  FUrURE
   Another example: (iii) Lagna in Karkata with Ravi (in lagna), S,ni, Chandra, Mangal and Rahu in Mesa, Budha in Simha, Sukra in Kanya and Tula is occupied by Vrhaspatlli and Ketu. (See Rules no. 46 & 59)
Haematemesis
(Disease involving spontaneous haemorrhage from the Stomach)
   63. If Mangal aspected by or conjoined with a malefic is posited in the 7th place from lagna disease of Haematemesis is possible.
64. If Chandra aspected by a malefic is situated in a cruel
rasi and is posited in the 6th place from lagna the native may suffer from this disease.•
65. If Chandra is associated  with or aspected by a malefic
aPd Mangal is posited in the 7th place from lagna the native suffers from Haematemesis.
66. If Mangal being in a cruel sign is posited in the 6th house
and is aspected by a cruel planet the native is attacked with this disease (viz., Haematemesis)
67. If Chandra and Mangal occupy Karkata rasi, or,
   68. When lagna rises in the debilitated house of Mangal and he occupies lagna (i.e. Karkata lagna occupied by Mangal) the disease of Haematemesis is possible.
  Our readers have definitely noticed that yogas relating to Phthisis, Consumption, Asthma, Haematemesis etc. are almost the same as there is slight difference among these diseases.
Birth•cbart of a native suffering from Haematemesis.
   Lagoa in Tula. Rahu in Vrscika, Ravi, Sani, Budha in Mina, Sukra, Vrhaspathi and Ketu in Vrsa. Chandra and Mangal in Karkata (See Rule No. 67). Over and above two watery planets, Vrhaspathi and Sukra are in the 8th place from lagna and they are aspected by malefic Rahu.
   Indigestion, dyspepsia, colic pain and gastritis: (Generally Chandra, Vrhaspathi, Sani or Rahu and 5th lord combined with or aspected by any maleiac cause these diseases.)
   The following are a few yogas that cause any one of the diseases said above.

* Houses of Re.vi, Mangal and..:,Sa.ni ai:e gener&lly ta.kin to be cruel. Sanakrii
equivalent ill Krurarasi.

DISEASBS	353
   69. If Mangal is in lagna and the 6th lord is weak disease& of indigestion, colic pain and spleen are indicated.
   (i) Similarly if Rahu or any other malefic he in lagna and Sani sits in the 8th place the native is attacked with the disease of indigestion or dyspepsia or both. (J. Parijat)
   70. If lagnapathi is in his inimical and at the same time debilitated house and Mangat occupies the 4th place and Sani is aspected by a malefic the native suffers from colic pain. (J.Parijat)
   (This yoga is possible if lagna rises io Simha, Makar or Kumbha rasi.)
   71, The native dies of diseases involving digestive organs if lagnapathi is combined with the lords of the 2nd and 4th houses.
   (i) The same disease may be the cause of death of the native if lords of the 2nd, the 4th and the 7th houses are associated together. (Jataka-Parijat & S. Chintamony)
   72. If Chandra conjoined with and aspected by malcfics is posited in the 6th the native suffers acutely from gastritis and allied diseases.
   73. If Budha is situated in the 3rd place from lagna or atmakaraka the native suffers from dyspepsia.
   74. If Vrhaspathi is associated with lagnapathi and the lord of the 4th or 8th place the native suffers from indigestion.
   75. If Vrhaspathi is posited in the 3rd or 6th place the native suffers from dyspepsia and ii that Vrhaspathi is seated in a watery sign the native has loose motions.
   76. If Chandra and Mangat together are in lagna the yoga produces unfavourable result like chronic dyspepsia;, indigestion etc.
(i) Only debilitated Chandra in lagna also produces the same
result.
   77. , When Chandra accompanied by a malefic is posited in lagna, 6th or 8th house the native suffers  from loss of appetite and indigestion.
   78. When the 6th or the 8th house is occupied by Chandra and Sukra, or lagna is occupied by Chandra, and Sani is posited. in the 5th place the disehse of indigestion; dyspepsia etc, is tho result.
23

354	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTUli.E

   79. If the lord of the 12th is in the 6th and the 6th lord is in the 12th the native is attacked with indigestion and chronic enlargement of spleen.
   80. If the 6th, 8th or lagna is occupied by Mangal and he is also conjoined with or aspected by a malefic the native may suffer from indigestion, dysentery and dyspepsia, The yoga may also cause the disease of piles and fissure.
   81. In majority of birth-charts it has been noticed that the native suffers from chronic indigestion when the 5th house is occupied by Vrhaspathi. Even a strong Vrhaspathi will not spare the native from suffering from this disease until and unless there is other protective force to counteract the unfavourable effect of this planet.
   82. Most of the authoritative books on Astrology have said almost decisively about the ill-effect of Vrhaspathi being in the 5th place from lagna. They further said:
   (i) Vrhaspathi in the 5th place when associated with Sani or Rahu the native suffen from indigestion, chronic amoebiasis.
   (ii) Or, if he is accompanied by waning moon and Mangal the aforesaid diseases will give immense trouble to the native.
   (iii) If the lords of lagna and 8th house are in conjunction with Vrhaspathi being in the 6th the native dies of the disease of indigestion. Even the lagnapathi brings about death of tbe native if he is associated with Vrhaspathi and be placed in the 6th house.
83. Death of the native is po sible duri !! •he dasa and
antardasa of the 8th lord if the lords of lagna and the 8th place together are posited in the 6th house from lagna.
   (i) Similarly if the lord of the Pitri (father) or Matri (mother) bhava is in conjunction with or aspected by the 8th lord and be placed in the 6th house the yoga may cause death of the father or the mother of the native.
(All these yogas No. 83 are quoted from S. Chintamony)

Strong Diarrhoea and Vomiting etc,
84. This disease is possible when-
   (;) Sukra being in the 6til is associated with and aspected by malefics.

DISEASES	355
   (ii) Mangal being in the 6th is accompanied or aspectcd by malefi cs.
   (iii) Lagna is occupied by Rahn and Budha, and Sani and Mangal are posited in the 7th house.
   I.iv) Chandra and Sukra together are placed in the 8th or the 9th house and are aspected by or associated with Mangal.
   Chronic amoeblasls & diarrhoea ( Ayurvedic term is Grahani) : (Symptoms of this disease are chronic dysentery, indigestion, passing abundant stool with mucus immediately after principal meals).
   85. If the 2nd house is occupied by Sani and Rahu the native may be attacked with this disease.
   My experience is that under this yoga if Vrhaspathi is associated with or aspected by a malefic the disease will certainly be the cause of immense trouble to the native.
   86. If the 6th lord is placed in the 8th house the native will suffer from this disease.
   87. If the 4th or 5th place from 'atmakarakamsa' is occupied by Rahn, Ketu or 'atmakarakamsa' or the 8th place from there is occupied by Ketu this disease is possible.
   88. If Vrhaspathi being in the 5th place is associated with or aspected by the 8th lord and any other malefic this disease may be the cause of prolonged suffering to the native. But if Vrhaspathi is placed in any favourable house with a favourable planet and acquires strength the disease may not be cured completely but the disease will be less troublesome.

Dysentery
   89. When lagna or its lord is placed in Mina ras1 ,n Navamsa Chakra the native may die of drowning or dysentery. (J. Parijat)
   90, If Chandra conjoined with or aspected by a malefic is placed in the 6th from lagna and Sukra is situated in the 7th the native is attacked with blood dysentery.  (J. Parijat)
 · (i)  Even Sukra with an unfavourable planet or aspected by a malefic may produce this disease if she is placed in the 7th place.

356	HIMDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE

   91. If lagnapathi combined with Vrhaspathi is posited in the 6th, 8th or 12th house the native may be atti.cked with dysentery.
   92. Similarly if Mangat associated with or aspected by an inauspicious planet is situated in a dusthana suffering from dysentery is possible.
   93. If waning moon is aspected by powerful Mangal and Sani is in the 8th place from lagna the native may be attacked with the following diseases :-  Piles, Fistula, Fissure etc.
   To ameliorate the painful condition he may use any caustic drug or may undergo surgical operation resulting into death. ( J. Parijat )
   (Some commentators are of opinion that the patient may die of Piles, Hernia or Kidney trouble after surgical operation).
   94. When the waning moon be in the 8th place and is aspected by Sani the same disease is possible.
   95. If lord of lagna is situated in any inauspicious house along with Mangal and Budha and the 6th house is aspected by them the native suffers from any disease in the anus (such as Piles, Fistula, Fissure etc.). (J. Parljat)
   96. When the moon occupies the 6th or 8th place and is aspected by Mangat, and Sani is in !agna the native will suffer from piles or similar such diseases leading to profuse blood discharges. (J. Parijat)
   97. When the lord of lagoa associated with any malefic is posited in the 8th place front lagna the native suffers from severe pain in anus. (J. Parijat)
   98. The disease of piles is possible if Sani is situated in the 8th place from lagna. (Ph. Dip.)
   99. When the 8th lord is a natural malefic and is situated in the 7th place from \agna and is also aspected by an unfavourable planet disease of Piles is possible.
   100. If Sani along with lagnapathi and Mangal i3 situated in Mina rasi, or the 7th place from lagna receives the aspect of
\agnapathi and Mangal the native is attacked with Piles.
   101. If Mangal occupying Vrscika rasi is not aspected by Vrhaspathi, or lagna is occupied by Sani, and Mangal is situated in the 7th place from lagna the person concerned suffers from Piles.

DISEASES	357
   102. When Mangal and Vrhaspathi. are conjoined with each other or one of the two is in the 7th place from the other the native suffers from Piles.
   Here is a birth-chart :-Lagna in Dhanu, Vrhaspathi in Mesa rasi and, Chandra and Mangat are in Tula rasi. The native has been suffering from Piles for a pretty long time.
   Another example : Lagoa in Vrscika rasi, Sani is in lagna, Mangat and Rahu is in Vrsa, Chandra in Kumbha. Though there is aspect of Vrhaspathi on the lagna from his position in Mina rasi. The owner of the chart (who is a lady) has been suffering from Piles and Fistula for about 10 years.
   105. If the lords of the 7th and the 8th places are natural malcfics and arc posited in any dusthana without receiving aspect of beneficial planets the yoga causes this disease. Thia yoga is possible if lagna rises in Karkata, Makar or Kumbha rasi and Chandra is waning.
   106. If Ravi is in lagna and the 7th place is occupied by Sani, and Mangat is posited in Vrscika rasi the native may suffer from Piles.

Hernia
   Generally those .vho suffer from chronic Dysentery and Piles for a pretty long time are attacked with Hernia. This is a disease of intestine.
   107. When lords of lagna, 6th, 8th and 12th houses are related to each other the native may be attacked with this disease. (i} Again if the 8th house and its lord are a sociated with or
aspected by a malefic this nasty disease is possible.
   108. If Chandra in watery sign occupying the place from lagna is aspected by a favourable planet from his position in another watery sign the person concerned may be attacked with Hernia.
   (The yoga is also the cause of Strangury-Enlargement of prostate gland} Both Sarvartha Chlntamony and /tJtaka Partjat support this view.
   109. When any one of the lords of lagna, 12th and 5th houses and the 8th lord are related to Cl!Ch other either by conjunctioJJ or aspect this disease is possible.

358	HINDU SCIBNCB OF THB FUTURB

This yoga also causes the disease of Piles.
110. When Ravi is the lord of the rasi where Rahu is situated
{i.e. when Rahu is posited i11 Simha rasi) and Ravi in conjunction with the 2nd lord Sani is posited in the 3rd place from lagna the yoga causes chronic Dysentery and ultimately the native suffers from Hernia.
  This particular yoga is	formed in toto in the following birth-chart :
   Lagna in Dhanu, Rahu in Simha and Ravi is in the 3rd place from lagna along with Sani the lord of the 2nd house.
   The native has been suffering from chronic Dysentery, Piles and Hernia.
Diabetes
   Sukra is the significator of Syphilis, Gonorrhoea, Kidney trouble and Urinal diseases. The seventh place indicates abdomen, pe!visJand the eighth place signifies bladder, genital organ, rectum etc.
   111. So, if Sukra associated with or aspected by a malefic and also in a watery sign or conjoined with any other watery planet is posited in the 7th or 8th place or any other dusthana or that afflicted Sukra be seated between malefics the native may be attacked with diabetes, kidney trouble etc.
   The 6th place or the lord of that bhava is indicator of these disease,.
   (I) So, if the 6th place or its lord in conjunction with afl!icted Sukra be placed in any watery sign or is confined between two malefics the disease of diabetes may be anticipitated.
   Here are two birth-charts. Both the natives are suffering from diabetes.
Chart No. 1 :  Birth date-1908, 18th February.
   Lagoa in Mithune rasi, Rahu in lagna, Sukra and Vrhaspathi in the 3rd place, Mangal in the 4th, Ravi, Chandra anc! retrograde Budha in the 5th, Ketu in the 7•h and Sani in the 10th place.
Navamsa Chakra .:  Lagoa in Mina rasi, Ketu in the 3rd,
Mangat in the 4th, Vrhaspathi in the 6th, Sani in the 8th, Rahu in the 9th, Ravi and Sukra in the !0th, Budha in the 11th and the 12tL. place is occupied by Chandra.

DISEASES	359
   Look at the Navamsa chart. Sukra the general indicator of this disease and also the 8th lord is conjoin.ed with and aspected by malefics, lagna is in watery sign. Majority of faults may bo found from Chandra-lagna too.
   Chart No. 2: Birth date-1909, 31st December (according to Western system 1st January, 1910). Lagna in Kanya, Vrhaspathi in lagna, Ketu in the 3rd, Ravi in the 4th, Budha and Sukra in the 5th, Sani and Mangat in the 7th, Chandra in 8th and Rahu in the 9th place.
   Navamsa Chakra : Lagna in Karkata, Vrhaspathi in lagna, Chandra in the 2nd, Ravi and Sukra in 3rd, Ketu in the 5th, Budha in the 7th, Sani and Mangat in 8th and Rahu in the 11th place.
   The 7th lord Vrbaspathi who is a watery planet is in lagna aspected by the lords of the 6th and the 8th houses (viz., Sani and Mangal respectively) is situated in a watery sign. So, the 7th house and its lord are very much afflicted. Again, general indicator Sukra is aspected by Rahu and in navamsa chart very weak and afflicted. Also in Navamsa-chart the 7th house is occupied by Budha who is • lord of dusthana. I,.agna falls in a watery sign and is occupied by a watery planet who is also the lord of the 6th place from lagna, and the 8th house is afflicted due to occupation of two malefics 3ani and Mangat.
   The owner of the chart No. I very recently died of diabetes and the owner of the chart No. 2 has been suffering from the disease for a pretty long time.

Enlargement of Prostate gland
   112. If Cl,aodra is situated in a watery sign, the lord of the 'janma rasi' (the lord of the rasi where Chandra is situated in the birth-chart) is placed in the 6th house and she (Chandra) is aspected by any planet occupying a watery sigh the disease is possible. (Jataka Parijat)
113. If the 6th, 7th or  8th  place is occupied  by  any
inauspicious planet and the 7th bhava falls in any cruel 'sastyamsa' the native may be attacked with this disease.
114. If Sani be in the 7th place and is aspected by Rahu, or
115. If Sukra b! in a fiery or windy sign and is placed in

360	HINDU SOIENOE OF rHE  FUrURE
any dusthana, or she is posited in her debilitated house this disease is possible.
116. If Mangal is posited in the 7th place and is aspected by
:any unfavourable planet, or
   Il7. If Sukra be the lord of 8th house from Chandra and is placed in a watery sign as wen as in the 6th place from lagna the native may be attacked with this disease.
   Here is an instance : Lagna .;n Dhanu, Chandra and Mangal in Tula rasi and Sukra the 8th lord from Chandra is posited in Mina rasi which is a watery sign and is the 6th house from Chandra. The native suffered from this disease· and had a aurgical operation in 1971.
Gonorrhea or Syphilis
   Il8. If Chandra in C')njunction with Sani is posited in Karkata, Vrscika or Kumt ,a  rasi in navamsa chart the disease of this nature is possible.
   119. If Chandra is associated with the lord of the 8th place and Rahu nas full aspect on the lord of the 8th house the native may be attacked with Gonorrhea or Syphilis.
   (i) If Chandra is afflicted in the manner noted above and the 8th house is occupied by three or more malcfics the same result may be anticipated.
   If the 8th house is occupied by any auspicious planet the native may recover from this disease.
   • This is to be noted that if the 7th house (that indicates. sex), the 9th house (which indicates religion, virtue, morality) and lagna, or lords of these houses arc not afflicted but we11- fortificd due to aspect of or association with powerful benefic& this type of disease may not occur at all. Because people having such favourable yogas should be men of moral stamina and seldom go astray and meet notorious end ill-reputed women.
   120. If lagna is occupied by Ravi, Mangal, Sani and Rahu the native may be attacked with Syphilis,
121. If Sukra, the indicator of passion is conjoined with any
malefic or be confined between malefics and be in lagna, or under that circumstance if afflicted Sukra Is posited in a lagna­ rasi which is Sukra's inimical sign the native may be attacked with Syphilis.

DISEASES	'.'61
   122. If the 5th house from lagna is c:>ccupicd by Ravi and Rahu, or Chandra and Mangal occupy Kanya rasi (Virgo) this disease is possible.
   123. When Sukra is associated with Gulik the native may be attacked with this d;,ease. lfaving such an unfortunate yoga in his birth-chart the native always hankers after women of bad character,
   It is said earlier that in spite of these malicious yogas if the lords of the 7th, 9th and lagna arc favourably disposed there is least chance of attack of this disease. But if it is otherwise, that is, if the aforesaid lords are afflicted due to aspect, association or malefic position the disease of this nature, namely Gonorrhea or Syphilis is possible.
   Even the following yogas may ultimately produce these nefarious diseases if the lords of the 7th, 9th and lagna are badly afflicted. The yogas are as follows :-
   (i) If the lords of the 2nd, 6th and 7th places are 11ssociated with Sukra and they arc aspected by or conjoined with malefics and occupy lagna the native may be passionate or lascivious.
   (ii) If lagnapathi and the lord of the 6th place are aspected by or in conjunction with malefics, or
   (iii) If only a malefic be in the 7th place and is also conjoined with the lords of lagna, the 2nd and the 6th places the native is ardently desirous of sexual relation with women.
   (iv) If the 9th place and its lord are associated with malefics and the Jorda of the 6th and the 7th houses together occupy the 9th house the native becomes very much passionate.
   If a birth-chart contains any of the above yogas along with those that cause venereal diseases there is strong posaibility of attack of these nefarious ailments. Only yogas of lasciviousness may not be the cause of such disease.
Disease of Prameha
   "Prameha" is a disease which has no English equivalent. Because this disease may develop as the after effect of excessive sexual act, gonorrhea or sex debility. The symptoms among others are as follows :-The patient may have pain in the loin, may have urinary trouble, sex organ grows weak and weaker everyday, consequently he is unable to satisfy his wife etc. The

362	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTIJBE
yogas almost are the same that cause Gonorrhoea or Syphilis. The disea·e may he caused by afflicted Sukra and lords of the 6th ad 7th lwuses.
   124. If iagna is occupied by Ravi, and Mangat is posited in the 7th house the attack of this disease is possible.
   125. If the 5th ho,ise is associated with Ravi, Sukra and Sani there i strong possibility of attack of this disease, or,
i26.  If Sukra is aspectecl by or  corubined with a m lefic and
be situated in the 8th place, or,
127.  If the 6th house is occupied by Sukra along with two or
more malefics, or,
   U8. If Sukra is situated in the 3rd p!e,oe eit,1er from lagna, atmakarakarosa. or atmakaraka the disease may give trouble to the native, or
129. If Mangal aspected by or conjoined with Sani is posited
in the 10th house the native may be attacked with this disease.
Enlargement of Scrotum
   130. If karakamsa is associated with 'Gulik' and is aspected by Budha only-that is, no other planet excepting Budba has aspect on karakamsa the native may be attacked with the disease of enlargement of Scrotum. (Parasarl Hora)
   131. If Rahu and Mangal or Rahu and Sani together are posited in lagna, or Rahn and Sani are combined with each other and lagna is occupied by Mangat attack of this disease is possible. (Jataka Parijat)
The  latter yoga produces some other ailments,  such  as,
inflamm&tion of naval cavity and ankles of the feet.
132. If the  lord of lagna is in the 8th place, conjoined with
Rahu and Gulik this disease is possible.
   133. Enlargement of Scrotum is possible if Rahn occupies lagna, Gulik is in the 5th or the 9th place, and Sani and Mangal are situated in the 8th place from lagna. (Jataka Parijat)
According to Sarvartha Ch/ntamony the disease is possible if
Rahn is in lagr,,. Gulik is in the 9th and Sani and Mangal are posited in the 8th place.
134. If the lord of Navamsa of the lord  of lagna  is in
conjunction with Rahn, Sani and Gulik the native suffers from this disease.

DISEASES	363
   According to some commentators Enlargement of Scrotum is possible if Sani and Mangat are situated in the 8th place from lagna.
   135. If the 8th place from lagna is occupied by more than one malefic the native may suffer from disease in the rectum and also enlargement of Scrotum.

Rheumatism or Gout
   136. If Sukra is placed in the 8th place from lagna and is also aspected by a malefic the native may die of Rheumatism. (This is also a yoga of Diabetes and Consumption.)
   137. If the lord of lagna is in Karkata in Navamsa chart the native may be attacked with this disease. Further, the yoga produces some symptoms of Lunacy.
   138. If Sani is in lagna and Mangal occupies any one of the 5th. the 7th and the 10th places the native may suffer from Rheumatism.
   139. If any one of the 1st, the 6th and the 12,h places is occupied by Sukra, and she is aspected by or associated with any malefic the native suffers from this disease.
   140. If Sukra and Mangal are situated in the 12th place from lagna as well as aspected by malefics the attack of this disease is possible.
   14I. If the waning moon and Sani together are posited in the 12th place from lagna the native suffers from this disease.
   142. If Sani is posited in the 3rd place from lagna or karakamsa this disease is possible.
   (Some astrologers are of the opinion that Sani in the 3rd place from atmakaraka planet may cause the disease).
The following yogas may cause the disease of Rheumatism:
   143. When combust Chandra is aspected by Sani, or the 6th house is occupied by Ravi, Mangal and Sani.
144,  The native is attacked with rheumatism or gout at the
age of 59 years of age if lagna is occupied by its lord and Sani is combined with an inimical planet.
   145. If lords 1f lagna and the 6th house are associated with Rahu or Ketu the native has the danger from snake, fire, thief and Rheumatism.

364	HINDU SO!ENOB OP THE FUTURE

Impotency
   146. If the 7th lord associated with Sukra is posited in the 6th place from lagna the native suffers from impotency.
   147. The native may become impotent if Chandra being in Tula rasi is aspected by Ravi, Mangat or Sani.
   148. If the 6th lord is combined with Budha and Rahu and is related to the lord of lagna the native may be impotent.
   149. If lord of lagna associatd with Mangal be placed in the 6th house the native is attacked with an incurable ulcer in his penis.
  [Sukra signifies 'Semen'. When this planet is weak and afflicted and 7th house or its lord is also afflicted the native becomes sexually weak resulting into impotency.]

Heart disease
   Heart disease is to be judged mainly from the 4th house and its lord. So, if the said place {bhava or house) or its lord is afflicled the disease of heart may be the reason of his suffering. Of course if that house or its lord has relation with any 11uspicious planet the native may be fortunate enough to avert heart trouble. Thin! house too has some bearing in this ailment.
   150. If the 4th house is occupied by Ravi heart disease is possible, The effect of this yo a is more certain if Ravi owns the 6th house. (Jataka Parijat}
   151. If the 4th as well as the 5t., are occupied by malefics and these houses and their lords withot;t being aspected by any favourable planet be situated in 'Krura' (very malefic or cruel) 'shastyamsa' the native suffers from this disease.
   152. If Saai, Mangat anJ Vrhaspathi together or Mangal Sukra and Rahu-tbese trio are situated in the 4th the native is attacked with heart disease.
   153. If the 3rd place is occupied by Ketu and he is associated with Gu!ik (Mandi) there is possibility of heart diseasL
   154. If the 5th lord with the lord of the 12th hou,e is positetf in the 12th place heart disease is possible, or
(i) If that 5th lord sunk down by sun's rays (asthagata) or be
deb1i1tated, or situated in an enemy h<'use the same result may be anticipated.

DISEASES	365

   I 55. If the 7th house from Jagna is occupied by Chandra and Mangal heart disease is possible.
   156. If any one of Vrsa, Karkata, Vrscika and Makar rasis is occupied by Chandra with any malefic heart disease may be possible.
   157· When Chandra is situated in the 6th or 12th place and with her there is Mangat, Sani or Rahu the native suddenly may be attacked with this disease. (Horiisiir)
   [Chandra signifies nerve and R vi signifies both nerve and muscle. Again, in judging heart-disease Chandra is more important than Ravi. This can be easily testified from the aforesaid yogas. So, in determining the cause of heart disease one should at first see the disposition of Chan<ira. There are other factors also, which may be found in the yogas enumerated before].
Hysterin or I.:pilepsy
   15S. When Chandra in combination with Mangal, Sani and Rahu be in the 8th place from lagna the native may die of Epilepsy or Hysteria. (htaka Parijat)
   Even waning moon situated in the 8th place may cause this disease. This view is supported by Sarvartha L'hintamony.
159. If the waning moon in conjunction with Sani, Mangat
.and Rahu is posited in the 8th place the native may be posse<Sed
-0f by evil spirit. and is attacked with this disease and ultimately dies. (Jataka Parijat)
160. If lagna or 8th house from lagna is occupied by Ravi,
;Chandra, and Mangal there is possibility of suffering from this
<'.isease.
   Sarvartha Chintamony says, 'If the waning moon in the 7th or any dustbana, is situated betw,,en Ravi and Mangal there is, strong possibility of attack of this disease. The disease becomes so acute and serious that the native ultimately succumbs tu it.
   161. If malefic planets are in the 8th place, Chan<ira and Sukra are situated in any kendra (4th, 7th or 10th place) the native may be attacked with Hysteria.
   An instance: Lagoa in Vrscika, Sani and Maugal in Mithuoe, Vrhaspathi and Rahu ir. Karkata, Ravi, Budha and Sukra in Mesa, Chandra in Kumbha and Ketu in Makar.

366	HINDU SOIENOE OF THE FUTURE

  At the beginning of this Chapter it has.been said that complete yoga indicated by configuration of planets in a birth-chart is not
always found. s , in that perspective astrologers will explain the
yogas on the basis of planetary positions, relations and aspect. Here in this case cited above it is found tbat-
   Sani and Mangat are situated in the 8th place from lagna. Sani, Mangat and Rabu have aspect (not full, Sani and Mangal have1/2 and Rahu has l1 aspect) on the waning moon, and the 8th place from Chandra is aspected by Mangal.
   The native suddenly developed fainting fits at t.he time of a serious wrangle in the family. Afterwards he had attacks of epileptic fits every now and then. Of course, the native recovered from this ailment after prolonged treatment.
   162. When weak Chandra occupying the 6th or 12th place is conjoined with Mangal, Sani or Rahu the native may be attacked with Hysteria. (Hora Ratnastir)
Lunacy or Insanity
   163. (i) If lagna is occupied by Ravi, and Mangat is in the 7th house from lagna, or (ii) Sani is in lagna and Mangal in the 7th house from lagna, or (iii) Sani is in lagna and Mangat in any 'Trikona' the native develops insanity.
   (These yogas are stated both in Brihat Jataka and Jataka Parijat).
   164. If lagna rises at Dhanu rasi, and Ravi and Chandra sit in lagna and Vrhaspathi occupies the 3rd or the 4th place from lagna the native becomes insane.
   • But Sarvartha Chintamony says that such a yoga of lunacy will be effective only when native's birth day is on Saturday or Tuesday. This view is supported by many experienced astrologers. In Jataktidesh along with the above yoga there is mention of another yoga, viz., if lagna falls in any sign within the 4 rasis from Dbanu to Mina, and Ravi and Chandra are situated in any trikona and Vrhaspatbi occupies the 3rd ot any Kendra the native may be insane if the birth day is on Tuesday or Saturday.
   165. If Budha and Chandra be posited in any kendra or they are in any malefic navamsa complete Joss of memory i1 possible, It is almost a state of imbecility or lunacy.

DISEASES	367
   166. When Chandra is conjoined wit, a _roa;efic and Rahu is seated in the 5th, 8th, or the 12th pl.1ce the uative develops insanity. The native not only is an insane person but also becomes violent on any flimsy ground. (Jataka Parijat)
   167. This is also a yoga of insanity if Ravi and Chandra are in lagna and the 5th or the 9th place is occupied by Sani and Mangal.
   168. When Vrhaspathi or Sani posited in lagna and the 7th place is occupied by Manga! the native becomes insane.
  {i) The native becomes a person of violent temper if Sani positing in lagna is in opposition to Mangal.
   I came across a birth-chart only last year in which Mangal ic in Makar lagna and Sani is in Karkata.
   The native's elder brother and sister left him alone in his house on account of his violent temper, The native himself told me that he became almost insane and all the valuable article• in the house were thrown on the road when he was incited to anger. He is an Engineer by profession, did not dare to marry due to his irritable temper.
169. If Chandra is conjoined with Sani or Ketu the native
becomes insane. We found many horoscopes where Chandra is associated with Sani or Ketu but tne owners of the horoscopes are never insane. But they are fickle minded and highly sensitive, sentimental and have no mental peace.
   170. If Chandra is conjoined with Rahn or any other malefic and is situated in any one of the 8th, 9th and 12th houses the native becomes quarrelsome and insane. (Sarvartha Chintamony)
   171. If the lord of lagna in association with Mangat and Budha is situated in the 4th or 12th place from lagna the native may suffer from morbid affection ol the nervous system. If these three planets have aspect on the 6th house the native becomes almost a lunatic.
172. If Rahu is in the 12th, Sukra in the 8th and Chandra is
associated with any malefic, parti ulatly Sani or Mangal the native becomes insane.
   173. If Budha is posited in the 3rd pface from atmakaraka or a amatyakaraka-lagna the same r suit is apprehended,
174. If  Chandra along with Ra u occupies any one or the

368	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
4th, the 8th and the 12th places and She (Chandra) is aspected by
a malefic the native becomes insane.
   [Rahu and Sani are windy planets. Chandra represents mind and Budha denotes intelligence. If these planets are afflicted the disease of insanity may develop].

Disease of Ovary and Uterus
   [These are female diseases. The seventh and the eighth houses from lagna denote abdomen and genital organs. Women's principal genital organs are ovary and uterus. If these houses (The 7th and 8th houses), their lords, and also Sukra and Mangat are afficted the disease of ovary and/or uterus is possible. In case of women both Sukra and Mangat are indicators of genital organs but in case of m n it is only Sukra that signifies these organs].
   175. If Navamsa lagna falls in the house of Mangal (either in Mesa or Vrscika rasi) and Iagna is aspected by Sani the native is attacked with di;eases in her private part (Vagina). (Jataka Parijat)
   176. If Mangat in the 7th house is aspected by Sani the native may be attacked with the disease of ovary. Even these two planets together in the 7th house may be the cause of ovarian disease.
   177. If Navamsa lagna falls in any house owned by Mangal and that house is the 7th place from lagna of the birth chart and if that navamsa lagna receives the aspect of Ra vi and Budha and there is no 11spect of any favourable planet on that lagna the native suffers from vaginal diseases. If that lagna is aspected by any auspicious planet the native shall be free from such ailment. (Jataka Parijat)
   178. If the 7th pla e is associated with a malefic and in navamsa chart that 7th place falls in the house of Mangat the same disease may be the result.
   179. If Sukra confined between malefics is posited in the 7th place from lagna the same disease may be apprehended.
   180. If lagr,a or the 6th place from lagna is occu;,ied by Mangat conjoined with or aspected by any other malefic the native may suffer from disease in uterus or ovary.

DISBASl!8	369

   181. If Sukra in Karkata rasi ia associated witlt or aspected by unfavourable planets or hemmed in between malefic• and the 7th lord is weak the native may suffer from uterine or ovarian disease.
182,  If  the 7th lord and Sukra are not well-disposed and
strong and they are afflicted due to conjunctioi; with or aspect by malefics the native may be attacked with vaginal disease.
   183. The weak moon associated with or aspected by Sani or Mangal may be the cause of uterine haemorrhage or menstrual complication,.

Disease of Fenr
   184. If Budb.a being in Simb.a rasi 1s aspected by a malefic the native may die of fever arising from disorder ot three humours (bile, blood and phlegm) of the body.
   {i) The same result is anticipated if the lagna (in the birth­ chart) falls in the navamsa of Mesa rasi.
  185. If tb.e 8th house from lagna is not occupied by any planet but is aspected by strong Budba the native may be attacked with a serious type of fever.
   186. If the lords of lagna and the 6th place from lagna are associated with Ravi th native is attacked with fever.
   187. If Mangal is posited in the 6th and the lord of the 6th place is in the 8th the native is attacked with fever at hi; (or her) 6th or 12th year of age. (Parasari Hora)
   188. If Rahu or Ketu is posited in the 8th house from lagna the native may be attacked with periodic fever. ( Sarvartha Chint amony )
189. If  the· tord of the 8tlt house acquires cruel Sasthyamsa
and is posited in the 8th house the native may also suffer from periodic fever. (Sa,vartha Chintamony)

Cancer
   "Ayurvedic" term of 'cancer' is 'karkat' roga (disease). Cancer is said lO be an incurable disease. So, proverb about this disease i, 'cancer has no answi.:r'. So was the case with Phthisis some
24

370	HINDU SOil!NOI! OF THE l!'UTURI!
years ago but this disease now can be cured completeiy.	We hope tim, i; nl)t far off when some specific remody to arrest the
grow th of ,t  is fatal disease and also to cure it will be found out
by eminent researchi&h.
   Cmcor is s ,id to be a malignant growth or tumour that cats the part l)f;1,0 body where it grows and alsl) spreads indefinitely. I have been trying for a pretty long time to detect tne c•uses of this disease astrologically.
I noticed  the following  reasons that may cause this fatal
ailments.
   (1) Cvmbination of or any other relation between Sani and Mangat and when any of those two planets receive the aspect of Rahu the patient may be attacked with this disease.
Here is a birth•chart :
   Lagoa 111 Kanya with Ravi, in the 2nd house Budha, in the 3rd house Sukra, in the 5th Ketu, in the 6th Sani, in the 10th Vrhaspathi and Chandra, in the 11th Rahu and in the 12th Mangal.
   fl.ore S.ini and Mang•! are opposing each other and Sani receives the aspect of Rahu.
   (2) If the 6th lord is in lagna, 8th or 10th house and malefic planets such as Rahu, Sani and Maogal have some relation with the aforesaid house/houses or their lords the disease of cancer may appoar in that part of the body indicated by these signs or houses or their lords.
   Sometimes planet afflicting or causing tho disease may show the symptoms according to the planet's own character. That is why phys,cians be in a dilemma and can not diagnose the disease at an early stage.
   Students of astrology must have noticed i.n the Karkata chapter that different parts of the body are ruled by different Planets, such as,
Ravi rulei over head, bone, marrow, nervous system, stomach,
.lungs, heart, vein, artery _etc.
Chandr is an indicator of blood, breast, stomach etc. Mangal rules over uterus, neck, genitals, intestine, anus etc.

DIBllASllS	371

   Budha rules over larynx	(wind pipe),_	respiratory organ, mouth, tongue, nose, navel etc.
Vrhaspathi rules over liver, tongue, thigh, respiratory organs,
,t.iigestive organ etc.
Sukra controls genital organs, prostate gland, urethra etc. Sani rules over leg, hand, teeth (including gum).
When these planets are afflicted  and  at  the same time own
malefic houses they are capable of producing cancer in any part or orge n of the body ruled by them.

Leukaemia
   This fatal disease is produced due to malignant growth of "hite corpuscles in blood which is termed as cancer of blood. Mangal and Chandra indicate blood and three watery signs Karkata, Vrscika, and Mina rasis, 4th, 8th and 12th houses rule 'bloorl'.
So, when rulers of blood (Chandra and Mangal) and any one
-0r two of the afores id houses together their lords are afflicted ct. 's fa ml disease is produced. In majority of cases of leukaemia Rah u has an important part to play by making any relation with these house-lords, Chandra and Mangal and the result is blood
.cancer.

Yogas indicating bad health
   190. If the lord of lagna is combined with a cruel planet or the lagnapathi (lord of lagna) is posited in the 8th place from lagna the native does not :.Ceep good health. Of course if the same lord rece'ives the aspect of any auspicious planet he may normaly keep good health.
191. If the lord of the rasi where  lagnapathi is  posited
-0ccupiec any d<1sthana tbe native does not keep good health.
   192. If the lord oflagna conjoined with any lord of dusthana occupies lagna the native may bi.! sic:dy.
   193. If the lord of lagna is a natural malefic and is situated in lagna or 'Janma rasi' (the rasi where Chandra is posited in the natal chart) or occupies any (kendra from lagna the native may be sickly but ii the lagnap:Hhi is placed in any  trikona or the I Ith house the native maintains good health.

372	HillDU SOIENCE OF :tllE FU:rtrBE

   194. If the 6th house and its lord are associated with malefic• and Rahu and Sani are in conj uoctio,1 the native alwaya
"ulfers from this or that illness.
   195. When lagna rises in Mesa, Mitbuna, Simha, Tula', Dhanu or Kumbha rasi and 6th lord is in lagoa the native may be attacked with such a disease that cannot be cured easily.
(Jatakalunker)
   (i) If la na falls in Tula and Vrhaspatlu though a natural benefic is there in lagna the native suffirs from various diseases every now and then.
This was experimented by me in a number of cases.
   196. If lagna is occupied by a lord of any dusthana or the planet tliat occupies lagna is posited in his debilitated or inimical liouse tile native may not keep good health. (Jataka Parijat)
   197. If the lord of lagna is posited in any dry sign or tile lord of the rasi where lagnapathi is posited is placed in any dusthana and in Navamsa chart also he is posited in " drv sign the native is attacked with many kinds of diseases anJ gets emaciated day by day.·(Jataka Parijat)
   ( Firy and windy rasis are ary signs. Firy ras1s are Mesa, Simha and-Dhanu. Windy rasis are Mithuna, Tula and Kumbha)
   198. If Ravi, Chandra, Budba, Sukra and Sani together are seated in a bhava the native is tall, poor, childless and ahay• suffers from various ailments. (Jataka Parijat)
199. If  Sukra sits in the 3rd or the  6th house the native
•offers from various diseases; but if Sukra be in advanced position from Ravi she (Sukra) will be beneficial and the native shall not be sickly.
   200. Jf Sani and Mangal together are situated in the 6th house and are aspected by Ravi and Rahu and lord of lagna i, weak the native suffers from a disease continually for a pretty long time. (Jataka Parijat)
   201. If Budha is conj"oined with the lords of bgna and the 6th house the native suffers from biliary diseases.
   (i) If these two planets (lagnapathi and the lord of the 6th house) arc in conjunction with debilitated S&ni the nat1 ve suffers from gastriti arising out of accumulation of ex:cessive gas in

PAINP!JL OR UNNATUR.lL DEATH	373

stomach or intestine.  The disease becomes very painful to the
native
(U)  If these two planets are associated with Vrhaspathi the
aative ultimately recovers from the disease.  (Jataka Parijat)


Painful or unnatural death
   202. The native may commit suicide by hanging if the lord of the 8th house is situated in Sani's drekkana and Sani is associated with Gulika or Rahu. (Sarvartha Chintamony)
   1'13. If Ravi is associated with Mangal, Rahu or Sani and be in cruel 'Sbastbyamsa' and is also aspected by SukraorVrhaspathi the native may be beheaded. (Sarvartha Chintamony)
   204. If Chandra aspected by lagnapathi be in any dusthana and she (Chandra) is associated with Sani, Rahu or Gulika the native meets with painful death. (Sarvartha Chintamony)
   205. If Sani is combined with an inauspicious planet, be posited in an enemy house, be debilitated or combust, or i• situated in cruel 'Shasthyarnsa', aspected by any enemy or unf,vourable planet the native meets with painful end of life.
   206. If the lord of the 8tb. house be in Pasa or Sarpa drekkana the native may die by banging or snake-bite. ( S. Chintamony)
   • (Th.e 1st drekkana of Karkata, Vrscika and Mina are called Pasa or iarpa drekkana. The 2nd drekkana of Vrscika is called Nigada and the 1st drekkanas of Makar and Simha are called Pakshmi drckkana.)
   Jataka Parijat give, some clues to determine the happy atid painful death, some of which arc explained herebelow:
"Janmani yannavamsakagatou mandistadiyastake
Ra80u tilthati chet Subhastu balaban Saukhyena nunram mriti1 Bltuputrc samarena Suryatanaye chouradivirdanabais Sarpadye1ch tath:i. rahou nripavayat kshidupe toyajat" (J.P.)
Meaning of the sloka :
(,')  If the 7th house from the position of Mandi is the Navamsa
$ign of any henefic and that Navamsa sign is occupied by a11y powerful henefic peaceful death of the native is expected.

374	HINDU l!OIBNOII OF '.!:HE FU'.l.'0118

  (ii) If that N,vamsa sign is occupied by Mangat the native may die in a war or it may be due to serious quarrel with opponents.
   (iii) If that Navamsa sign is occupied by Sani the native may die of snake-bite or bite of any reptile, or he may die of a fatal wound inflicted by a hooligan.
   (iv) If that Navamsa sign is posited by either Ravi or Cb.andra the native may be sentenced to death by the Government or he may be killed by any aquatic animai.
   207. ff the 8th house is aspected by any pow.erful planet the nativo may die due to affliction of any constituent of the body indicated by that planet.
• Constituent of the body indicated by Ravi-Bile; Constituent of the body indicated by Chandra-Wind and
Phlegm;
  Constituent of the body indicated by Budha-All the three humours (Wi•.d, Bile and Phlegm);
  Constituent of the body indicated by Sukra-Phlegm :ind Wind;
Constituent of the body indicated by Sani and Rahu-Winj.
   (I) IF the 8th  house is aspected by Ravi the native may be burnt to death.
   (2) If the 8th house is aspccted by Chandra the native may die or any water-born disease.
   (3) If the 8th house is aspected by Mangal death may occur due to wound by any weapon.
  (4) If th.e 8th house is aspected by Sukra and Sani death may be due to hunger.
   (5) If the 8th  house is aspected by Budha death may be­ due to fever.
   (6) If the 8th. house is aspected by Vrhaspathi death may be due to Phlegmatic disease.
   208. lfthe 8thhouse is afflicted by any malefic planet painful death is p .sible.
(i) If the 8th house is occupied by any malefic planet death

PAINFUL OR UNNATURAL DEATH	375

of the native is possible due to conspiracy of some wicked men, or he may die of a wound inflicted by a hooligan.
   209. lf the waning moon being in the 8th place from lagna is aspected by strong Sani the native may die either of any disease in the anus or he may die of a wound by any weapon.
   210. If Ravi and Mangal he in any angular position from the 8th lord the native may be sontenced to death by the king of the land and hanged.
   211. If weak moon be in lagna, Ravi in the 8th place, Vrhaspathi in the 12th and the 4th place from lagna is occupied by a malefic the native may fall from his bed or may be assassinated by a low caste Hindu.
   212. Iflagnapathi is posited in the 64th Navamsa Rasi or be combust and also occupies the 6th house from Iagna the native may die of hunger in a lonely place during prevalence of famine in the country.
   213. If lagnapathi and the 8th lord are weak and Mangal i& associated with the lord of the 6th house the native may die in a war, or death may occur due to any sort of fatal wound in a feud with simebody.
   214, If the waning Moon, Mangal, Sani and Ravi are posited in ,he 8th, 10th, lagna and 4th place respectively the native may be beaten to death by a rod or a club.
   2'5. If the waning Moon, Mangal, Sani a.nd Ravi occupy the 10th, 9th, 1st and 5th place respectively the native may die of suffocation or fire, or he may be trampled to death while runnir.g away in headlong panic.
   216. If Mangal be in the 4th, Ravi in the 7th and Sani be situated in the !0th house from lagna the native may be sentenced to death by the lawful government, or he may die of a wound inflicted by any sharp weapon.
   217. If Sani occupies the 2nd house, Chandra the 4th, and Mangal occupies the 10th hou e the native may die o! gangrene caused by a surgical operation.
   218. If the 10th house is occupied by Ravi, 4th house by Mangal he may die of an accidental fall from a vehicle.

Suicide and uonltval or accidental death
   219. Jf the lord of the 10th Navamsa from lagna is combined with Sani the native may commit s11icide by swallowing poison.
   220. If the 5111 house from the 9th place from Chandra is occupied by any 01alefie or any of those houses are aspccted by any unfavourable planet and the 8th Bhavasphuta be posited in sarp•. nigada or pasa drekkana tbe native may commit suicide by hanging.
   221. If the 4th and the 10th o; the 5th and the 9th houses are occupied by m,lefics and the 8th lord is associated with Mangal the native may commit suicide by hanging.
   222. If the waning moon in combination with Sani, Mangal or Rahu is posited in the 8th place the native may be burnt to death, may die by being c'rowned in water, or may be possessed of by evil spirit and die.
   223. If Chandra bemg in · the 6th, 8th or 12th place from lago3 ;, aspccted by the lagnapathi and associated with Sani, R,hu and G11lik (Mandi) the native dies an unnatural death.
   224. ff Ravi or Mani•l be in the 4th house and Sani in the 10th place from lagna and
   (I) Ag11in iC Ravi be in the 4th house and M•ngal in the 10th. and both th.e planets are aspected by th.e waning moon the native's death is posaible by impalement (piercing with something pointed).
   (II) If Ravi be in the 10th, M1ngal (without being associated with any benefic) in the 4th and lagna is occupied by Budha the native may die of a fatal blow of a bullock or by impalement.
225. If the beneficial planets aspected by malefics be in the
4th, 8th or 10th house the native may die in a riot or fracas.
   226. If the 4th house is occupied by Man gal or the 7t!t house by Ravi, and Chandra and Sani together be in the 8th house from 1agna the native may die of food poisoning.
   227. If lagna is occupied by Ravi, the Sth house by Sani, the 8th place by Chandra, and Mangal i1 posited in the 9th the native may die oC thunderbolt or fall from a tree.
228. If Clu1ndra conjoined with or confin•d between malefics

SUICIDE AND UNNATURAL OR ACCIDENTAL DPATH	377

is posited in the house owned by either Mangal or Sani the native may die accidentally by firearm.
   (i) The same result is possible if Chandra in the 4,h place from hgna be in Kanya rasi (Virgo) and is situated between malefics.
   229. If Sani being associated with and aspected bymalefics be in the 2nd house from lagna the native may be wounded by dog-bite, and ultimately may die of hydrophobia.
   (i) The native may be bitten by a dog,if Sani associated with and aspected by a malefic be posited in the 2nrl in combination with the inrd of the 2nd house.
   g,O. If the lord of the 3rd house and Vrhaspathi in conjunction with Rahu or the lord of the Rasi where Raliu is situated are posited in lagna there is chance of being wounded by a bullock.
   211. If the 6th house is occupied by the 8th lord, lagna by the 12th lord and Chandra is associated with the lord of the 6th hous, the native may apprehend danger from a four-f.ioted animal at his 8th year of age.
   232. If Ravi be in the 6th or 8th place and Chandra be in the 12th place from Ravi, the native may be drowned ;n water at the age of 5 or 9.
233. If lagna rises in a dual sign and Chandra be in the
1.agna the native may die of drowning.

CHAPTER XVII
When Rajayogas are inefl'ective ?
   [ Raja.yogas here include Dhana. yoga (woalth giving yoga). good academic career, yogas that bring 11'":iut fortune, high position in society 1111d profeasiona.1 c11reer, popularrity,na.me a.ud fame C'-k.
   In the following p'.l.tagrtphs most oft.he yoga.!i mentioner] will be ta.kfln to be unfavourablA and their mftlefic cfi,-.ct may mar the excellent ·osult of Raja yogas. Beeides them a few 11nfa.vo11ni hlo yogas such i:i.s extinction of lineage, illitomcy, beggary etc, will he oxpfainod. :
   234. If at birth Ravi posited in Mesa rasi (which is his house of exaltation) occupies Tula rasi in Navamsa chart and is aspected by an unfavnurable planet the native becomes penniless.
   (i) Similarly if in the birth-chart Sukra occupying Kanya rasi be in the lowest debilitated position and being in the same rasi in Navamsa chart she is aspected by a malefic the same result of penury is apprehended.
   (Sukra's highest exalted position is 27°degree in Mina rasi and 27° degree in Kanya rasi is her lowest debilitated position. Ravi's higest exalted position is 10° degree in Mesa rasi and lowest debiiitated position is 10° degree in Tula rasi.
   So, malefic nsult referreU to above two yogas are not expected to be effective if the aforesaid planets be not in their debilitated positions in navamsa rasi.)•
The yoga that ruakes a man a beggar.
   235. In case of Makar lagna if in the 10th house Ravi is situated in bis lowest debilitated position (that is, 10° de ree in Tula} or he is in Tula rasi in Navamsa chart the native lives on alms.
A few more yogas of beggary :
   (i) If Chandra in the 4th house from lagna is posited in her lowest debilitated position and is aspccted by a malefic.
·	·
1<According to Skirnda. mere position of tbe,;e planets in Nkhn-lrnhotra or Nicha­
nava.msa is uot expected t0 give the unfa,vourahfo fi!Sult a.ci tnted ab::.ive. They must be in a partfoular bhava to be ca.pa.hie of destl'oying p:ood effect of the. boro:1cope.

WHEN llAJAYOGAB ARE INEFFECTIVE	379

   (ii) If Mangal in the 8th house from lagna is posited in his lowest debilitated position and is aspected by a malefic the native under the aforesaid yogas anyhow manages his livelihood by begging.
   ( Chandra's highest exalted position is 3° degree Vrsa and 3° degree Vrscika rasi is her lowest debilitated position. Ma gal's highest exalted position is 28° degree in Makar rasi 2nd 28° degree in Karkata rasi is his lowest debilitated position.)
   (iii) Similarly Budha in the 71'1 place from lagna is posited in his lowest debilitated position, i.e. 15° degree in Mina rasi and is aspected by a malefic.
  (iv) Vrhaspathi being in his lowfSI debilitated position in Makar rasi (5° degree in Makar rasil receives the aspect of an unfavourable planet.
   (v) Sukra in the 5th house from lagna be in the lowest debilitated position and is aspected by a malefic.
   (vi) Sani in the 2nd house from lagna be in the lowest debilitated position in Mesa rasi and is aspected by a malefic.
   Under the afores•id yogas which are considered to be very unfavourable the native suffers from poverty and has to live. on alms.
   236. If Sani without receiving aspect of any favour"ble planet be in lagna or in any other angular position the native may be a beggar.
  (i) IfSani, Chandra and Ravi together be in any kendra the native becomes a dullard and a beggar.
   (ii) IfChandra in conjunction with Man!!al is posited in Mesa rasi and receives the aspect of Ravi and is not aspected by any favourahle planet the native will be a beggar.
   217. While Chandra cccupies lagna, Sani in any kendra from l;igna and Vrhaspathi is situated in the 12th place the native is forsaken by his own men, expelled from his house and is to live on alms.
   (i) If the lord of luck (9th lwuse1 's in the 12th place:, nd l<.endras are occupied by malefics the native is addicted to sinful acts and lives at others' expense just like a parasite.

380	HINDU SOIENOE OF THB FUTURE

   238. If the lord of the 9th is in the 12th, the 12th lord is in the 2nd and the 3rd houso is occupied by unfavourable planets the native is attacked:with hernia. He is mean-minded, immoral and beccmes a be gar.
   239. If the 10th house is not occupied by any planet, and most of the planets are either in their inimical houses or in their houses of debilitation the native is illiterate, 1bort-tempered and a beggar. He is without wife and children.
   240. If Vrhaspathi in conjunction with Rahu or Ketu is aspected by an unfavourable planet the native is mean, or is en aged in heinous activities. He is selfish and a liar.
  241. If Vrhaspathi is posited in the house of debilitation and is aspected by any other planet from his debilitated house the native indulges in heinous acts iaspite of his best pedegree.
This yoga is possible in the following manner :
(i) Vrhaspathi in Makar, and Mangat in Karkata.
(ii) Vrhaspathi in Makar, and Sani in Mesa.
   All the veteran astrologers spoke highly of "'Nicha-Vanga Rajyog,".	If the yoga stated above are so unfavourable then "Nich-Vanga Raja yoga" has no meaning at all. (When Vrhaspatl:i isin Makar and Mangal is in Karkata it is Nicha-Vanga Rajayoga and they from their debilitated houses are asp,cting each other.'!
   Probably the author of Sarvartha Chintamony is correct when he pointed out that the aforesaid yogas will be unfavourable only when Vrhaspathi is in conjunction with or is nspected by any other unfa\'ourable planet other than the planet in debilitation that aspects V ri1aspathi.
   242. If the lord of lagna is in the 12th place and Chandra ill conjunction with Mangat is situated in any unfavourabie rasi the native suffers from poverty in a foreign Jc ad.
But S,rrvartha Chintamonv is of the opinion t'1a1 this yoga will
be very malefic proYided Chandra and Mangat in conjunction with a "Krura" planet be posited in the 10th place from lagna and the lord of Iagna is in the 12th house.

Extinction of Family lineage
   24.l. If the lord of the 9th is posited in the 12th house, lagnapalhi and lord of janma.rasi remain unaspected by any

WHEN A NATIVE IS CONSIDERED A DISGRACE TO THE  FAMILY  381

favourable planet the nativ,: shall have no issue and his family line shall be extinct.
   244. It Kendra (or Keodras) .is occupied by both be1<efic and malcfk planets 2nd	Chandra	occupying Sani's  navamsa is
;,spected by the lord of lagna the yoga causes extinction of family line.
[i)  Similar result is apprehended when the 7tn  he>usc  from
Chandra is ,,ccupied by Budha and Sukra, Vrhaspathi is in the 5th place from lagna, and the 4th and 8th houses ( from lagna ). are occupied by n:aldic planets.
   (ii) Again the following configuration of planets gives the same result. Such as:  Chandra is in the 10th, Vrh,tSpathi in the 7th and a malefic plantt is situated in the 9th house.

When a natiYeh  considered a disgrace to the family '?
   245. If Chandnt, Bud ha and Sukra ar ii 11ated in angular position and Rah!J i:, li1 L.igna the nat1ve becomes unscrupulous and is a disgrace to his family.
   According to Saravali, an important book on Astrology conjunction of Chandra, Bud ha and Sukra makes a man highly educated and cultured but in spne of these q ualitits the man is mean, greedy and unscrupulous.
2J6.  If the  6th, the 8th and 12th places from the 5th house
tthat is, the 10th, the i2th and the 4th home, from lagna) are occupied by m•defics. or Chandra and Vrhaspathi are situated tn lagna and 7th house is posited by Sani and rvtangai the native becomes poor, and creates a discord among own men for which he is hated by all.
247. The  native is c.._1nsidered a disgrace to .:is family under
t Ile following yogas :
(ii  When the 4th house is occupied by all the malefic planets.
(ii) When lagna, the 5th, 8til a 11d  i°2rn  houses are occupied
by malefics.
Uii) Wh n ail inaus,)ic1ou:.-. planets are  ituated in lagna, the
.Sti1 and the 12th hou::ie.
   (ir)  When maktic plan t or planets are in iagna, Chandra is in the 4th. tht: 5th 1Jlact 1s 0ccup1 d by '\'rha::.pathi and the lord or the 5th house is w ak.

382	HINDU ROIENCE OF THE FUTURE

   (v) When Sukra in combination with a malefic is in the 4th house, Budha in the 7th, Vrhaspathi in the 5th and Chandra in conjunction with a malefic is in the 8th place from lagna.
   (vi) When lagna is occupied by waning Moon, and combust Vrhaspathi is situated in the rasi owned by Sani.

Rekha yoga
  This is one of the worst yogas as described in Jataka Parijat. A person born under this yoga,as ifhe bas no right to live in society as a mun. Fur he has neither knowledge nor wealth. He suffers from estreme poverty, he is lustful and wrathful. He is filthy has no gruce and always picks up quarrel with others. He sho,1.-s disregard to gods and brahmins.
   It is almost a verbatim translatinn of Sloka No. 26, Ch. VI of Jaraka Parijat. I donot know why it is termed as Rekha yoga. 'Preshya' (Servitude), 'Kemadruma' (daridra) yogas also come under this yogci. Some commentators are of the opinion that
.Rekha yogas mar the beneficial effect of Raja yogas.
   248. (i) If the lord of lagna is weak and aspected by the 8th lord and Vrhaspathi is scorched by Sun's rays it is Rekha yoga.
   (Ii) Whan !he lord of Navamsa of the 4!h lord is obscured by Sun's rays and aspected by the lord of the 12th place it is Rekha yoga.
   (iii) When the 4th lord is conj ined with the 6th lord, the lord of the 9th hoase in combination with the lord of the 8th house is posited in the 5th house and the lord of lagna is weak it is Rekha yoga.
   (iv) When bencfics are in dusthanas (6th, 8tb and 12th houses), malefics in kendra and kona positions and the lord of the 11th house is weak it is Rekha yoga.
(v) If the 9th lord is scorched by Sun's rays, the lords of lagna
:rnd dhana (2nd place) are posited in their debilitated houses it is Rekha yoga.
   (vi) If any 3 plrnets are obscured by Sun's rays or they are situated in their own debilitated hou.ses and the lords of lagna is either weak or placed in any dusthana (6th, 8th and 12th places) 1t is Rek ha yoga.

THE YOGAS THAT BETRAY POVERl'Y	383

(vii) If malefic planets are either debilitated or aspected by
,lan,ts posited in their inimical houses and are placed in lagna, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 9th, 10th or 11th houses it is Rekha yoga.

The Yogas that indicate Poverty
( These yogas of poverty are described here in addition to those narrated in p. 130)
249. lf any one of Vrhaspathi, Mangal, Sani and Budba be in
'his house of depression or obscured by sun s rays and is placed in
<th, 6th, 8th. I Ith  or 12th house the native not only suffers from
fiAancial distress but also has to live on aims.
   250. When Sani being placed in the 6th house is aspected by an unfavourabl, planet, and Ravi and lludha occupy lagna the native is poverty stricken ind is to Hve on alms.
   251. If Mangal, Budha, Vrhaspathi, Sukra and Sani are posited in the 5th, 6th, 81!1. 10th and 12th pl.ices respectively and lord of the 12th hou-;e is d1!bilitated or either combusr, scorched or ohscured  hy sun's rays and the lord of lagna is without stn ngth the native suffers from poverty and has no other means to maintain his livelihood than begging.
Here all the 5 planets may not be posited in the manner stated
;n the above sloka9 but when majority of them are situated in most of the bhavas stated above, lagna-lord is weak, ihe lord of the 12th house is debilitated an Combust or scorched by sun's rays unfavourable results indic,,ted in the sloka are expected to occur.
   252. If Chandra, Mangdl. Vrhas athi and Sukrd are situated in any four bhavas out of ,be 5th, 7th, 9th, 10th and 11th the native shall be very puor, or,
   (;)  When debilitated Sukra is posited in :.1gna, the jth house is occupi d by Vrhaspathi being in his hou:; of depression, debilitated Mangal in th.e !Ith and Chandra in her house of depression occupies the 3rd place the person having such a yoga will definitely be penmless..
253. If lagnas both in  birth and navamsa charts fall  in
.:ardin•l signs and Vrb.aspatb.i other than  b.is own  sign is posited iu <b.e 6th or 12tn house the nui ve shall be poor and a beggar.

384	HINDU SCICNCE OF THB FUTURE
   254. In case of birth at night if lagna rises in cardinal sign, (chara rasi), favourable planets are weak and posited in kendra and kona, and malefic planets occupy those bhava; othert har. kendra the native is sure to live on alms.
The following yogas are quoted from Hora Raina (author i•
Yannacharya) :
   255. When the lord of lagna in association with a malefic is posited in the 12th house or benefic planets are obscured by sun's rays the native becomes penniless.
   256. If inauspicious planets are placed in kend.ra and benelic planet are weak and obscured by sun's rays the native b comes imbecile and poor.
257. If the  lord of  lagna  is  posited  in  the  8th house
(particularly when he is obscured by sun's rays). the 10th lord in the 6th and the lord of the 2nd house is in the 12th place the native will be poor.
258. When lords of lagna and the 7th house are in the 6th,
the 5th place is occupied by a strong malefic and Vrhaspathi and Sukra are obscured by sun's rays the native is penniless and distressed,
259. If the lae111-lord  be in the  6th and the lord of the 2nd
house associated with or aspected by "Krura", (very malefic) planets is situated in the 8th place the native is po:.Jr	and imbecile.
260. If the 2nd  house is associated witb and aspectrd by a
malefic and the lord thereof is conjoined with Ravi the native will be poor.
261. If  the  lord of the 2nd house  is  in conjunction with
malefics and obscured by sun's rays -evr.n  if  the 2nd hous? i
occupied by auspicious planets or
  262. If favourable planets occupying the 6th and the 11th houses and the lord of the 2nd house is sunk down by sun's rays the native will be poor.
2)3.  Tl1is als'.) b trays poverty ,1 anct when hoth the !agna
lords of the birth and navamsa charts being combined  with the 10th lord ·1nd a1s!1 t\1e Jord of the 2nd hcrnse b:ing associated with unfavourable plant.ts are posited in the- 6th ho1.1se and the 2nd house is occupied by ma efic planets.

TBB JOGAS TBAT BETRAY POYEKTY	385
   264. If the 2nd house is occupied and aspected by inaus­ picious planets and the lord of the 2nd house i_s placed in the 3rd tile native becomes poor.
   265. When the 2nd house and four kendras are occupied by malefic planets not only the native himself will be poverty­ stricken but also his kith and kin born in the family is bereft of wealth.
   266. If Ra vi, Sukra and Sani together be posited in any bhava a wealthy person also under this yoga will be poor, but when Mesa or Simila Rasi is occupied by these three planets and conjoined with Budha and aspected by Vrhaspathi the native becomes a very wealthy man.
267. If Chandra, Mangal, Sukra and Sani  together  are
posited in any bhava even a wealthy man under this yoga becomes poor.
   268, When the 10th place from lagna, 11th place from Ravi and 8th place from Chandra are not occupied by any planet the yoga produces poverty.
   269. If the 2nd house is posited by a debilitated, combust and krura planet and the lords of the 2nd and II th houses are conjoined with unfavourable planets the nat-ive become. poor.
270. When favourable planet be in dusthanas ( 6th, 8th and
12th places) and unfavourable planets are in Kendra or Kona the native any how is capable of managing his two meals but it is very difficult for him to get money to purchase his clothings.
   The following yogas of poverty are qaoted from 'Lagha Puasad':
271. If lagnapathi is in the 12th and  the 12th lord is in
Lagoa and the latter is aspected by or conjoined with a "maraka" planet it is a yoga of poverty.
   272. If there is an exchange of planets between lagnalord and lord of the 6th house and they arc aspected by a "maraka" pi,.net the native born with a silver spoon in his mouth becomes poor.
273. When  lagna  and/or  Chandra  arc  aaaociated  with
Ketu and the lord or laana ii placed 10 the 8th and aapected by
or conjoined with a ..maraka" plnet theyoa;a produces poverty.
2S

386	miinu SOIENOE OP THE PUTUBB
   274. If lagnapathi is conjoined with' the lord of the 6th, 8th or 12th house and is aspected by an inauspicious planet the native will be poor. Even the aspect on lagnapathi by the lord of the 5th or 9th house will not mitigate the ill effect of poverty, but if the said lagnapathi receives no aspect of the lord of the 5th or 9th house the native shall be very poor.
   275. If the lorJ of the 4th is in the 6th and the lord of the 9th is in the 10th house but aspected by a maraka planet the person having such a yoga shall be poor.
   276. When an unfavourable phnet aspected by or conjoined with a ''maraka10 planet be posited in lagna and- lagna is not occupied by the lord of the 9th or 10th house it is a yoga that betrays poverty.
   277. lf the lord of any bhava exchanges places with the lord of the 6th, the 8th or the 12th house and is aspected by any unfavourable planet particularly S1ni the native bocomes poor.
   278. If the lord of Navamsa of the lord of Janmarasi ( i. e. where Chandra is posited} is associated with a  "rnaraka"  planet or be posited in maraka-sthana the yoga produces poverty.
   279. When the Navamsa-lord of lagnapathi posited in dusthana is conjoined with or aspected by any "maraka" planet the yoga produces poverty.
280. It is a  yoga of  destruction  of "Dhana" yoga when
Chandra and Mangal are in the 2nd place from lagna".
   (i) It is also a yoga of poverty if Ravi being in the 2nd house is aspected by Sani but when Ravi is not aspected by Sani the native will be very rich.
   (ii) Again if Sani aspected by Budha is posited in the 2nd house the native owns great wealth.
   281. If Vrhaspathi being in the 2nd house is aspected by Budha the native becomes poor.
   282. Bud ha when aspected by Chandra and posited •in the house of wealth makes a man pauper.
   The following yogas of poverty are quoted from 'Sarvartha Chintamony' :
   283. If lagnapathi is weak and a,sociated with an unfavourable plane,, posited in the 12th and the lord of the2nd house is associa· ted with Ravi and aspected by a malelic, or be  n the house of

THE lOGAS '.rHAT BETRAY POVERTY	387

depression the native incurs displeasure of the Government and looses money.
(i) Similar result is apprehended if that 12th lord is in the
2nd, the lord of the 11th house is in the 12th and the lord of the 2nd is in any dusthana or posited in his debilitated house.
   284, If the 2nd lord conjoined with Ravi or the 10th lord is situated in the 12th or in his debilitated house and also combined with an unfavourable planet the native looses money owing to displeasure of the Government.
   (i) If the lagnapathi combined with a malefic be posited in the 8th place similar results noted above is apprehended.
   285. If the lord of any dusthana is aspected by Mangal, the lord of the 11th house is in the Navamsa of an inauspicious planet, weak or conjoined with an unfavourable planet dan aspected by or combined with the 3rd lord the native looses money due to activities of thieves or fire or he may loose money owing to punishment inflicted by the Government of the land.
   286. The native becomes poor if the Navamsa lord of the dhanapathi (lord of the 2nd house) is situated in any dusthana, combined with a malefic or placed in "Krura" Sastyamsa.
   287, If the Navamsa lord of lagna is an unfavourable planet, associated with the lord of the 2nd house,posited in any dusthana and at the same time conjoined with or aspected by the lagna lord, the native has to loose money due to fire, activities of
.thieves or wrath of the Government.
288.  The native is poverty-stricken if the 2nd house, its lord
.and the lord of the 11th house are in conjunction with malefics.
   229. When Ravi being associated with an unfavourable planet is weak or debilitated and is in conjunction with the 12th lord or lord of Navamsa of lagna and is also aspected by the lord of the 2nd house the native becomes poor.
   290, If the Dhanapathi (lord of the 2nd house) is in "Krura". Sastyamsa and is placed in any kendra or kona or associated with debilitated Ravi the native has meagre income.
   (i) Similar result is expected when the I Ith lord is posited in "Krura" Sastyamsa and is not aspected by either Vrhaspathi or Sukra.

388	HINDU BOIBllOB OP !l!llB PU!i!URB

   The following yogas of poverty are quoted from 'Bbavartha Ratnakar':
   291. If the lords of the 4th, 9th and lagna are posited in the 2nd house the native suffers from penury till his death.
   I have no experience of such a yoga giving such an unlucky result and wby the yoga shall impart such a bad result can not be reasonably explained.
   292. (i) It is a yoga of poverty if the 2nd lord is in t be 12th and the 12th lord in the 2nd.
(ii) It is a yoga of poverty if the 2nd lord is in the 12th and
the 12th lord in lagna.
  (iii) It is a yoga of poverty if the 5th lord is in the 6th and the 9th lord in the 8th.
(iv) It is a yoga of poverty ir the 4th lord along with the lord
of the 9th place is posited in the 8th, or the lords of the 4th and lagna or the lords of lagna and the 9th house  are posited in the 8th.
   (,) When these three Bliavas viz., the 4th, 9th and lagna are­ associated with unfa\-ourable planeh or the Navamsa lords of these Bhavas are conjoined with the lord of the 8th, or lord of the 6th or 12th house cast aspect on those Navamsa lords the native. shall suffer from extreme poverty.
   Again if Dhana-lord is in the 12th and 12th lord is in the 2nd place it is a sign of poverty, but if any one of these two lords viz., lords of the 2nd and 12th are placed either in the 2nd or 12th house and other planets particularly lord of Dhanasthan  i& posited in any favourable house the pecuniary stringency shall not be so acute.  But this is also to be remembered that if the navamsa lords of these two planets-i.e., the lord of the 2nd and the 12til are posited in any dusthana or conjoined with or aspccted by any Ioctl of dusthanas very unfavourable result may be appretlended,	In Parasari-Hora it is stated that the lord of the 12th when combined with the lord of lagna and  also lord of
the !Ith andthe12th are combined in any Bhava the native shall loose wealth and shall be involved in debt.
   This is also stated in that treatise that when lagna-lord is in the J 2th or lords of the 12th and the 8th are in lagna the native shall loose all his money and shall have to incur debt,

DARIDRA A>ID OTHER UNfAVOURABLI! YOGAS	389

  Here is an instance-lagna in Tula. Rasi, Sani in Makar, Vrhaspathi In Kumbha, Kctu in Mina, Ravi in Mesa, Budha in Vrsa, Sukra in Mithuna and Mangal and Rahu in Kanya.
   In this Bitth-chart the 9th lord is in the 8th and the 8th lord in· the 9th and the lord of the 2nd is in the 12th place. The native is a poor man no doubt but the 5th lord Sani is not in the 6th place and Dhanakaraka (wealth-giving) Vrhaspathi in spite of his fault as a 6th lord is placed in the 5th pl• ce from lagila, This is probably the reason why the na.tive did not suffer fro
-extreme penury.
   2nd instance-Lagoa in Simha Rasi, Rahu in Tula, Sukra in Kumbha, Mangal in Mina, Ravi, Bud ha and Ketu in Mesa. Sani in Vrsa, Vrhaspathi in Mithune and Chandra in Karkata.
   In this chart Mangal the lord of the 4th and the 9th is in the 8th, 8th lord is in the 11th and lord of the 6th is in 10th the native though a son of a very rich man is over head and ears in debt and bas been suffering from extreme poverty. This is to be noted particularly in this case that Mangal wh9 is the only yogakaraka planet is posited in the 8th and worth of the horoscope is practically lost.

A few Daridra and other unfavourable yogas :
( According to Vrihat Jataka Chandrika)
   In this book the author bas given a few unfavourable yogas naming them as Hradba, Fanimukha, Kaka, Byagbratunda, Hutasana, Kemadruma and Lalati. Names of tbeso yogas are peculiar and are not found in any other authoritative book or I think these yogas are not commonly found. Even the Kemadruma yoga mentioned here is not the ono which is generally found in other books of Astrology.
   293. Hradha yoga : This yoga is produced when Mangal, Ravi, Sani and Vrhaspatbi are posited in their respective houses of debili_tation. A person born under this yoga will suffer from ill health, financial miseries, He will have no peace in the family and in most times will remain unemployed.
   294. Fanlmukha yoga : If Sukra, Ra vi, Chandra and Sani are in their houses of depression, the native has very low position in service and possesses no money and peace.

390	HINDU SCIENCE OE' THE E'UTUBB
   295. Kaka yoga :  When Karkat lagna rises and JMangal be in Mesa, Sukra in Mina, and Chandra occupies Kanya Rasi, the native suffers from mental depression all the time.
   296. Byaghratunda yoga : Sukra in Kanya, Vrhaspathi in Makar, Ravi in Tula, Sani together with Mangat is in Mesa Rasi. The native born under this yoga is devoid of any good quality and becomes poor.
   297. Hotasana yoga: Lagna in Mesa Rasi, Sani in lagna. Chandra in Vrscik, Mangal in Karkata and Ravi, Budha and Sukra are in Makara. The native under this yoga becomes very poor.
   298. Kemadruma yoga : If the 7th place from Chandra is without any planet and that place is not aspected by any benefic the native becomes poor having gloomy disposition. He may have liason with the wife of any superior person.
299. Lalati yoga :  When Sani or Rahu be in lagna and the
10th place from lagna is not occupied by any planet the native: earns his livelihood by begging.

Delineation or some Vargas as they were dealt with by
Maharshi Parasara and some other antbors
   Maharshi Parasara mentiond in	his Parasari Hora about Sada-Varga, Sapta-Varga, Dasa-Varga and Sorasha-Varga.
   1. Sada-Varga includes Lagoa, Hora, Drekkan, Navamsa, Dwadasamsa and Trimsamsa,
(Lagna means Rasi-chakra or birthchart)
2. Sapta-Varga includes all 'Sada-Vargas'  plus Saptamsa
Varga.
   3. D•sa-Varga contains all Sapta-Vargas plus Dasamsa Varga, Sorashamsa-Varga and Sastyamsa-Varga.
   4. Sorashamsa-Varga contains all the dasa-vargas plus Turyamsa, Vimsamsa, Chatur-Vimsamsa (24th div.), Sapta­ Vimsamsa (27th Jiv), Chatterimsa (40th div), Pancha-Chatterimsa
{45th div).

A. Sada-Varga is termed as Klmsukamsa Varga.
(i) If a planet acquires two Vargas of his own the planet i1
aaid to be in "Kimsuka".
(ii) If a planet acquires  three Vargas of his own he is in
"Benjan•t Varga.
(iii) If a planet acquires four Vargas of bis own he is in
"Chamara'' Varga.
(iv) If a planet acquires five Vargas of his own he is in
"Chatra" Varga.
   (v) If a planet acquires six Vargas of his own he is in "Kunda!"' Varga.
   (vi) If a planet acquires seven Vargas of his own he is in "Mukuta" Varga.
B. Dasa-Varga Is termed as Parijatadl Varga.
   (i) When a planet geta two Vargas of his own he is in 'Parijata' Varga.
   (Ii) When a planet gets three Vargas of his own he is in 'Uttama' Varga.

392     mRDU SOIBROB OP TIIB PUTUBB
   (iii) When a planet gets four Vargas of his own he is in 'Gopura' Varga.
(iv) When a planet gets five Vargas of his own he is in
'Simhasana' Varga.
   (v) When a planet gets six Vargas of bis own be is in 'Paravata' Varga.
(vi) When a planet gets seven Vargas, of bis own'he is in
'Devaloka' Varga.
   (vii) When a planet gets eight Vargas of his own he is in 'Brahmaloka' Varga.
   (viii) When a planet gets nfoe Vargas of his own he ia in 'Satruvahana' or lndravabana Varga.
(ix) When a planet gets ten Vargas of bis own be is in
'Sreedbama' Varga.

C. Sorasha-Varga
   (i) When a planet a· quires two Vargas of his own he is in 'Vedaka' Varga. (ii) Simi,arly three Vargas of his own, 'Kusuma', (Iii) fonr Vargas of his own 'Naga-puspa', (iv) five Vargas of his own 'Kanduka', (v) six Vargas of his own 'Kera!', (vi) seven Vargas of his own 'Kaipa Vrksha' (vii) eight Vargas of his own 'Cbandan bana', (viii) nine vargas of his own 'Puma-Chandra',
(ix) ten Vargas of his own 'Ucbhai-Srava', (x) eleven Vargas
of bis own 'Dbanantwari', (xi) twelve Vargas of bis own 'Suryakanta',  (xii)  thirteen Vargas of his own 'Vridhruma',
(xiii) fourteen Vargas of his own 'lndra-Simhasana', (xiv) fifteen Vargas of his own 'Goloka', (xv) sixteen Vargas of his own 'Sree-Vallava',
5. What these different Vargas ind.lcate?
   (i) From lagna (or kshe...a as we may tall it):-judgement about body, Structure, Constitution, health etc.
(ii) From Hora	one's wealh, poverty etc.
(iii) From Drekkan ....,	relation (favourable or unfavourable)
with brothers and sisters.
(iv) From Turyamsa	luck or fortune.
(v) Fr m Saptamsa	children and grand-children.
(vi) From Navamsa ........wife or husband.
(vii) From Dasamsa .........prosperity and upliftment.

Dl!lLINIIATION OIi' 80MB VARGAS	393
   (Ix) From Sorashamsa .........happiness. or	miseries	and conveyance.
(:rl	From Vimsamsa .........prayer and worshipping of God
Almighty.
(xi) From Chaturvimsamsa	knowledge and learning.
   (xii) From Sapta-vimsamsa.........strength and weakness (no commentator has tried to explain this).
(xiii) From Trimsamsa	danger in life (aristha).
  (xiv) From Chatterimsa.........general good or	bad result (that a native may enjoy).
(xv) From Pancha-Chatterimsa
and	everything that is good or evil.
(xvi) From Sastyamsa ............
  * Special indication of Sastyamsa and Sorasbamsa is that when a planet occupies a cruel or very malefic (Sanskrit equivalent is 'krura•J Sastyam•a good effect of that planet and of that bhava (where the planet concerned is posited) is lost.
   Again, if a planet sits in a favourable 'Sorashamsa' good effect of that planet apd the bbava (where that planet is posited) is enhanced.
6. How to determine ¦ favourable Varga of a planet ?
   (i) If a planet acquires the Varga of a planet who is the lord of a Kendra from the former bis Varga (i.e. the varga of the lord of that Kendra) is favourable.
   (ii) If that planet or Kendra-lord of that planet is comhust, vanquished in planetary war, debilitated, malefic in 'Sayanadi bhaVa' or old or dead that Varga has no worth.
   Say, Budha is in Kanya exalted, his kendra-lord is Vrbaspathi who is situated in Makara which is his debilitated house, or Budha in navamsa chart occupies Mina where he is debilitated, or Vrhaspathi is unfavourable in 'Sayanadi bhava', or be is dead or old then Vrhaspathi's Varga acquired by Budba will carry no worth at all.
  (iii) If any Rajayoga occurs due to relation between Budha and Sukra the yoga will not produce any benefl.c result, because Budha is ineffective in Varga.
Therefore this can be concl','ded that a planet or planel"s effect
. on account of any rajayoga or any other favourable yoga through

394	l{INDU SOll!NOll OF THE FUTURE
them will not be beneficial until and unless they are favourabte and strong in Varga-chakra.
Of course effect of one Varga is not the final say.  In this way
a planet's worth is to be examined in either Sada-Varga, Dasa­ Varga or Sorasha-Varga etc.
   It will not be out of place to mention that Maharshi Parasara's method of testing Varga-strength is somewhat difficultor strenuous but what to do, If we want to arrive at an accurate decision from a chart it must have to be done.
Again this also must  not  be forgotten that judgement of a
birthchart does not depend only on all these mechanical processes. The mechanical process of working out Varga-strengtb. and other relative factors will give the astrologer the basica\ data only. The astrologer shall be able to give his judgement on the accuracy of these data provided he has developed power of intuition and also relies on his experience.
Maharshi Parasara has given some clues for determination of
the strength of a planet.  They are as follows:-
   (a) Strength of a planet is full if he is posited in his own or exalted sign.
   (b) If a planet occupies the seventh place from his own house. or be is in his debilitated sign strength of the planet is nil.
   (c) If the planet in question is posited between his exalted and debilitated house the numerical strength is to be worked out by rule of three,
E.g.  Ravi's degree is 4'-10°-20', be is sitnated between his
exalted and debilitated signs.
   Ravi's e.xalted point is o•-10°-0' and debilitated point is 6'-10°-0'. This means Ravi is debilitated 6 signs apart from his. exalted sign, which is 180 degree. G nerally a planet's totd strength is taken to be 20 (of course in some cases it varies). Now we are to find out the numerical strength of Ravi by rule of three.
For 180" numerical strength is 20
For 120°	,,	,,	is -
120X :o= 4o= 13!.  This means Ravi has already consumed
180	3
131 out of 20 and is able to give 6f result only.
   (d) Mangal, Vrhaspathi and Sukra are effective in Ravi"s. Hora. Chandra, Sukra and Sani are effective in Chandra's Hora

DBLINBATION 01' sor,u VARGAS	39S
(this means Sukra is effective both in Ravi and Chandra's Hora), Budha brings about result both in Ravi and Chandra's Hora, but if he is in  neutral sign in the birth-chart he is more effective in Chandra's Hora and in an odd sign in the birth cbart he gives better result if he occupies Ravi's Hora.
   (e) In Trimsamsa Varga Ravi gives tbe result of Mangal and Chandra gives the result of Sukra.
   (f) Those planets who occupy the seventh place from Ravi in the birth-chart are said to impart full result ( whether favoura­ ble or otherwise).
   (g) When a planet is in combination with Ravi and has identical degree with him (Ravi) the result is nil, i.e. his action is defunct.
7. How Varga-chakras are analysed ?
   (a) There is no clear-cut process mentioned in Parasari Hora to delineate a Varga-chakra. From that great treatise we only know which chart indicates what. Such as, Lagoa indicates body, health etc,, Hora indicates wealth, Drekkan signifies happy or unhappy relation with brothers or sisters etc.
   Actually we are not told by tbe author how we can come to a conclusion with regard to one's relation with his brothers and· sisters from a Drekkan-chart.
   My idea is that the clue lies with the third house of Drekkan chart. If that house is occupied or aspected by papas or the lord of that house is not friendly with the lord of lagna of the birth or Drekkan-chart relation with brothers and sisters may not be happy.
   Again, if the lord of the third house acquires benefic Varga& or the lord of third house of the Drekkan chart is benefic and in majority cases acquires benefic Vargas in Sada or Dasa-Vargas the relation of the native with bis brothers and sisters may be congenial. Otherwise the result may be the reverse.
   (b) Navamsa chart ( Varga ) according to Parasari Hora­ indicates wife or husband and I think, this means conjugal life also. Therefore, if the seventh house from Navamsa lagna or its lord or both acquire favourable Varga and also the seventh house of Navamsa chart is occupied by a natural benefic the wife or·

396	JIIND'II SOIBNOB 01!'.TBB PU'ttJBB
•the husband as the case may be is expected to be good to the native's liking and conjugal life of that person will als!) be happy. This is the way how we can judge all Vargas.	But this may also be the case that Maharshi Parasara might not lay much stress on delineation of Vargas. His only directions to his readers are confined to determinations of strength of· planets and bhavas.
Other incidental results of Vargas have been spoken on suitable occasions. Such as :-
   (i) The native may be a charitable and generous person if the lord of lagna; 4th, 7th or the 10th acquires 'Parijata' Varga,
   (ii) The native may be a very generous person if lord of any of these houses is in "Uttama" Varga.
(iii) If any one of them be in "Gopur" Varga the native will
be a person full of vigour and manliness.
   (iv) If any one of them he in "Simhasana" Varga the native is respected and honoured by all.
(v) If any one of them be in "Paravata" Varga the native
.will be a brave and straight-forward person,
   (vi) If any of them be in "Devaloka" Varga the native may be a leader of an Assembly or a Council.
  (vii) If any one of them be in ''Vrhmaloka" Varga the native may be a great sage.
(viii) If any one of them be in "Satruvahana" or "Airavata"
V rga the native may be in happy mood under any circumstance.
(ix) "Sreedhama" Varga cannot be attained by anyone in
.kaliyuga.
8. Indication of results for lords of some other bhavas :-
(i) When the lord of the 5th house acquires "Parijata"' Varga
the native gets education according lo the standard of his family.
(ii) When the 5th lord be in "Uttama" Varga the native will
be highly educated.
(iii) When t e 5th lord be in "Gopur" Varga the native will
,earn name and fame and he will be recognised as a great learned
,man by all eminent . persons of the world and his contribution in
.the field of learning will bt, remembered by all.
(Iv)  If the 5th lord be in "Simhasana" Varga the native will
•be a renowned educationist and a great minister or adviser to the head of the state.

D LINEATION OE' SOJIIB VARGAS	397

  (v) If that lord be in "Paravata" Varga the native acquires Brahma Vidya.
   (vi) If he is in "Devaloka" Varga the native will be a 'Karma yogi" (meaning he will perform his worldly duties dispassionately and surrender himself to God Almighty.)
   (vii) If he is in "Brahmaloka" Varga the native may be a true devotee of God and worship God with untiring energy and devotion.
   (viii) If be is in "Airavata" Varga the native will also be a great devotee of God.
9. About 9th lord.
  • (i) If the 9th lord acquires "Parijata" Varga the native visits holi places on several occasions.
   (ii) If the lord be in "Uttama" Varga the native used to visit many sacred·ptaccs in his previous birth and in this birth also he shall visit such sacred places on many occasions.
   (iii) If the lord be in "Gopura" Varga be shall during this and after this birth will perform sacrificial deeds (Jajna).
   (iv) lfthc same lord be in "Simbasana" Varga the native will be courageous, truthful and self-restrained person.
(v) If be is in "Paravara" Varga  he will be a devotee of
'Brahma' and be a "Parama--bansa" in. this and after this birth.
   (vi) If the lord be in "Devaloka" Varga the native will be a "Laguri" and "Pitru-dandi" (the meaning is not clear lo me).
   (vii) If the lord be in "Brahmaloka" Varga he will perform "aswa-medha" Jajna (horse-sacrifice) and will become the king of heaven.
(viii) If the lord attains "Airavata"' Varga the native becomes
true incarnation of ju tice and religion.
   ( This yoga was found only in the birthcharts of Sri Ramchandra and Yudbistbara).
Nothing has been mentioned about' Srcedhama" Varga.
(ix) When both the 9th and the 10th lords be in "Parijata"
Vd.rga the native becomes a great educationist an<l reformer.
   (x) If they are in 'Uttama' Varga the native becomes a £r•at king posse,sing many horses and elephants (no" •a-da>• motor­ cars, aeroplanes may be substitucd in	place of horses •nd, elephants).

398	HINDU SCIENCE OP THE FUTURE
   (xi) If they are in "Gopura" Varga the native becomes an emperor adored by all kings (now-a-days king or emperor is seldom found anywhere).
   (xii) If they are in "Simhasana" Varga the native becomes a a king of kings. This yoga is found in the birth charts of Maharaja Harish Chandra, Bali and Vaiswanara.
  (xiii) In Kali yuga men like Yudhistbir, Salivahana, Nagarjuna will be born if the 9th and 10th lords be in "Gopura" Varga.
  (xiv) If they are in "Paravata" Varga advent of 'Manu' is possible.
(xv) If they are in "Devaloka" Varga Dasavatar from Matsa
to Kalki are born.
   (xvi) And Sayambhuma Manu is born when the 9th and 10th lords are in Airavata Varga.
   9. The autbor of Jyotirnirbandha (comparatively a recent publication of 18th century) an important book on astrology gave some important clues for delineation of six Vargas only, viz., Hora, Drckkan, Saptamsa, Navamsa, Dwadasamsa and Trimsamsa.
According  to  him, from  Hora  Chakra native's complexion,
honesty and his love for others should be judged.
In case of Hora-chakra the first house is Karkata, and second
·house is Simha. (i)  If Jagna rises at Karkata i.e. the !st house and the second house (Simha rasi) is occupied by many planets (at least more than four planets) the native rises very high in life and will be the best man in his family, He will be handsome, very well-behaved and accomplished in manners.  (ii)  If lagna falls in Simh.1 rasi ar:d many planets are in the 12th place from lagna the result will be the reverse.
Over and above a man's wealth or poverty may be judged
·from Hora Chakra. Here, also if there are more number of planets in tb.e Karkata rasi and lagna rises at Simha the native will not be a wealthy man.
   (ii) In Drekkan chakra-If any Kendra from lagna (Drekkan 'Lagoa) is occupied  by  any  planet in exaltation the native
,becom , a king or a prosperous man like a king.

DELINEATION OF SOME VARGAS	399
If  the  planet  occupying any kendra (from Drckkan lagna) is
$iluated in his own sign the native becomes a Commander of king's army ; if tha I kendra is the planet's friendly sign the native becomes an orator.
   If the Drekkan lord is fully powerful and is also aspected by a friendly planet the native may get all the benefic results indicated by the Drekkan-chakra.
   (iv) In Saptamsa chakra-If the lord of the third house from iagna is aspected by or combined with benefic planets the native may have many brorhers and sisters.
Hthe same lord is aspectcd by or combined with malcfics only
he may not have any brother or sister.
   (v) In Navamsa chakra-lf the fifth lord from lagna is a natural benefic and is aspected by another natural beneficial planet the native may have many children.
   If that lord being a natural malefic is aspected by or associated with an  unfavourable  planet  the  nati ve's relation  with  his
.:hildren may be strained or he may not derive any happiness from them.
  {vi) ID Dwadasamsa cbakra-Jf the seventh lord being a natural benefic is aspected by or combined with a natural favourable planet the native will have one wife and he gets sons through that wife.
If that seventh lord being a natural unfavourable planet is
-combined with or aspected by natural malefic the native's conjugal life will be unhappy and be does not get happiness from his children.
   (vii) In Trimsamsa cbakra-If the eighth lord from Jagna be a favourable planet aspected by or associated with a benefic the native breaths bis last with full consciousness in a holi place.
   If that lord be a natural malefic planet associated  with or aspected by natural malefic the native may die of nasty disease or be may die of fire or drowning.
Readers must have noticed that author of Jyotirnirbandha bas
.different view from that of Maharshi Parasara with regard to indication of aforesaid cbakras.

400	HINDU SOlllEOE 01!' !rHB l!'U!rUl\E

   •In	Jyotirnirbandha the author has said in almost all the slokas that	when the planet in	question is aapccted by or combined with either benefic or malefic the result will have to bo deduced accordingly.	Now, the question is, what sort of aspect it should be ; whether the planet in the birth chart will cast bi aspect on the planet in a Varga, or a planet as he is placed in the· Varga will cast his aspect on that planet.  Many astrologers arc of the opinion that a planet in a Varga can not cast his aspect on another bhava or a planet, as no authority has corroborated such opinion. But Dr. B. V. Raman and some other eminent astrologers do not SU!)port this view.  I am also of the opinion that if a planet in a Varga may have no aspect on another the author would never mention anything about such aspect or he would say that the planet in the birth chart  may cast his aspect on another planet posited in the Varga-chakra.
   Old Schools are of the opinion that a planet in a Varga may be aspected by another planet posited in the b-irthchart and the author has mentioned about such aspect only; I think the opinion of such astrologers of old school are not tenable.

TABLES

Rast, Gana, Varna and Yonl ·Cbakra

nanNakshatraGanaVarnaYont'l Aewini
2 Varani
3 Kriihik•De\'Q Nara RakahasaK hatriy& &ltarn1tote VaiayaBoree Elephant Ram'Mosa
Vrsa3 Krlthika
4 Rohini
5 Mriga.siraRakabaaa N&n, DevaVaiay• 61ternate Su4raRam
Se.r.pent
M1tbuue5 Mdgasira
6 Adra
7 PunarvasnDev• Nara DevaSudra alteroaie Va.isyaSerpent.
oD.o,g
R.arhta7 Puoarv1uu
8 Pu :ra.
9 Aslo11baDeva
&kahaaa.Vi.p.ra
..Cat Ram C&t
Siwha10 Magba
11 P. l' lguni
12 U, FalguniBaks:b.as• Nara NaraK.a.halrlya
..R.a.t
Cow
Kanya12 U. F•lguni
13 Hasta,
14 Chitca.Nara Deva Rakaha.saVaisya &.ltiernate SudraCow Boffa!o Tiger
Tula14 Chir,r111 lfl Bwati 16 Bisak:b.1Ra.kshHa Deva RakshaaaKabatriJ•
&1tijfD8.t8
Sudt•Tiger Butfalo Tiger
Vrscika16 Bhakba
11 Anuta.dba
18 Jycs baRakabasa Deva Rak:sbaeaV.i.pra
..Tiger
De..er
Dhann10 Mool&
:JO l'lurbaaarba
2l lJ ttara.sa.rha.Rakehasa
Nara
,.Kahatriya
.".Dog t4onkay Moogoose (Nakul)
M.11.iar
21' Uttarnsa.rha 2'..l Srava.1.;,a
Z3 Dh, nii.tba
Nara Deva. Ra.ksbasa
Va.isya. o.hetna.te Sudta,
Mongoose Moc.v.ey Lion
B.umbba23 Dh<l.uistba
24 S:i.t,a\·ish11,
25 1-'.bhadra.p11..di1.Rak..shaea
.Na.taSudra. alrernate VaisyaLiou Hoiae LIOA
Miaa25 l-',bba.draps.da
2G U .bbf!.dtapada
?.7 SevatiNara
n:;aVi.p.ra
..Lion
co..
Eleph&nl
2	HINDU SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE

Oha	Yamndhapatbl
Day1st
Yama2nd
Yama3rd
Yama4th
Yama5th
Yama6th
Yama7th
Yama8th
YamaSunRavSukBudJiChSanVrhsManiRavMonChSanVrbsMangRavSukBudhChTuesMangRavSukBudhChSanVrbsMaogWedBudhChSanVrbaMatigRavSukBudbTh \lr1VrbsMangRavSukBudhCbSanVrb1FriSukBudbChSanVrbsMaogRavSukSatSanVrhsMangRavSukBudhChSan

Ratri Yamardbapatbl
Day  1st Yama2nd
Varna3rd
Yama4th
Varna5th
Yama6th
Yama7th
Yama8th
YamaSunRavVrhsChSukMaagSanBudhRavMonCbSukMangSanBudhRavVrhsCbTuesMangSanBudhRavVrhsCbSukMaag\Ve,JBudbRavVrhs.CbSukMangSanBudhThursVrhsChSukMangSanBudhRevVrhsFriSukMangSanBudhRavVrhsCh'SukSatS,nBudh·RavVrhsChSukManaSenRav-Ravi Ch-Chandra  Mang-Mangat Budh-Budba
Vrhs-Vrhaspathi Su.k-Sukra Saa-Sani

Y•&.H.rdba-


Dh·• Daadapllhi

,,.

...	..

TAllLES	3
TABLE OF SANNADJ CHAKRA
J'aama NadiKarma.
N&diBanghallk Na.diSa.muday NadtVlna9h
NadiManas
N,dl1.  A,wioiIto1618232S2.  Varani211171924263.	Krittika31218202S274. Rohini4131921261s. Mrigasiras1420222726. Adra6152123I37. Puoarvasu7162224248. P.usya8172325359.	Aslcsha9182426,\610, Magha101925275711. P. FalgII202616812. Uttar Falg122127279i3. Hasta1322l3810i 14. Cllitra1423-49II15. Swati15-2435101216. Visakha162S46II1317. Anuradha1726571214!&. Jestba1827681315-,1,9.. Moola
,J.	P. s,.rba19
20I
27
89
1014
1516
1721. U. Sarha2139ii161822. Sravana2241012171923. Dttanistha2351113182024. Satavisa2461214192125. P. bbadr2571315202226. U. bhadr2681-l16212327. Revati21915172224
4	HINDU SOIENOE OF THE FUTURE

o.:,,;·,A.-VARGA TABLE ( or Sarani)
Ksbetra-Cb1kra

Rasi.Mes IVn
2Mith
JKart
4Sin
5Kany
6Tu!
7Vr'sc \ D.b.o
'
Makr 10Kum
IIMina
l2AdhipatiMangSukBudhChRaviBudhsu,bog ,\.rhSan'lrn \Vrh

DR: KKAN-CHAKRA

RatiMesVnMithJKartSinhK:-.nyTai j Vr-,,:
Dhni, t:ikrKumMinnupio
10th part
l
2
3
4
5
6
7-
'
9w
II
12    upto 20th p,art5
6
7
3
9
10II12I2
)•upto
30th part9IOII1212
34s61I
TURYAMGSA-CHAKRA


AmsaMes
VrsaMith IKart
SinhKanyTutVrsc
OhoMakr
KumMina
7/3012
l
45
6
7
8
9
10
ll
1215/0•567
89
10ll12
l
2
322/J078910ll12l
2
J4
5
6301010II12IlJ4s
67
89
Mca-Meaa Vna-Vraa Mitb-Mitbune Kart-Karkat  Siob-Sinha  Kanya-Kanya

T¦J-Tula Vrsc-VrllCika Dhn-Dhanu  Makr-Makar  Kum-Kumbba Mina-Mina.

TABLES	5
SAPTAMGSA•Cf{A.KR,\




: :	•-::: ,--:-1
.\ , -	- -' : _,-::-]
J\' --"	I





NAVAMGSA•C:HAKRA













'

6	HINDU SCIENCE OF BE  FUlrlJBI!






DASAMAMGSA·CHAKRA



ArasaI
Mc,2
Vrs3
Mith4
Karts
Sinh6
KBDY7
Tul8
Vrsc
9
Dbn
10
MakrII
Kum12
Mina
3/0
I
JO
3
12s
2
7
4
9
6
II
B
6/0
2
ll
4
I
6
3
8
5
10
7
12
9
9/0
3
12s
2
?
4
9
6II
8I
10
12/0
4
I
6
3
8s
10
7
ll
9
2II
lSJos
2
7
4
9
6II
8
I
10
312
18/0
6
3
8
5
10
7
12,
2
JI
4
I
2,10
7
4
9
6
11
8I
10
3
125
2
24/0
8s
10
7
12
9
2
ll
4l
6
3
27/0
9
6II8
I
10
3
12s
274
30,0
JO7
12
9
2II
4l
'6
3
8s
RasiRaailla1iRasi
RasiRasiRaaillasi!Willaai!".uiRui
TABLES	7





DWADASAMSA•CHAKRA


Amsa

2/30
Mes

1
Yrs

2Mith

3Kart

4Sinb

5Kany

6Tul

7
Vrsc

8Dbn

9Makr

IOKum

IIMina

12
5/02
3
45
67
8910II12
I
7/30
3
4
5
67
8
9
10II12
I2
10/045
678
910II12I23
12/305
6
7
8
g!O
II
12I
23
415/061
89101:eI2345
17/3078910II12I23456
20/08910II12I234567
22/309
10II12I2
3
4561825/010II12I2345678927/30II12I234567891030/012I234s67891011
,8	•HINDU  SCIENCE OP THE FUTURE

SORASAMSA•CHAKRA













..
l

TABLES	9
TRIMSAMGSA·CHAKRA ( BISHAMA RASI)

Amsa
Mesa
Mithune
Sinha
Tula
Dhanu
Kumbha
5
Mangal
Mang
Mang
Mang
Mang
Mang
10
Sani
San
San
San
San
San
18Vrihas pothi
Vrhs
Vrhs
Vrhs
Vrhs
Vrhs25
Budh
Budh
BudhBudh
Budh
Budh
30
Sukra
Suk
Suk
Suk
Suk
Suk

TRIMSAMGSA·CHAKRA  ( SAMA  RASI  )


Amsa
Vrsa
Karkat
Kanya
Vrscika
Makar
Mina
5
Suk
Suk
Suk
SukSuk
Suk,';_
Budh
Budh
Budh
Budh
Budh
Budh
20
Vrbs
Vrhs
Vrhs
Vrhs
Vrhs
Vrhs
25
Sail
San
San
San
Sao
Sao...,,.,
.:,v
Mang
Mang
Mang
Mang
Mang
Mang
lO	HINDU SCIENCE 01' THE FUTURE






la
';;;;;
•


SASTHYAMGS"A CHAKRA t I J
MH Vu Mith Karl Sinh Kan)' T•I  Vue Dhn Makr	8

0  •	K,m
=	z

Mina

Ams• K,1la

**

*
-lie
*
*

*
*
I 
I	2
'	'	3
3 J	4

4 4	5

5 5	6
• 6	1
1	7	8
8	8	'
9	'	10
10	10	11

11	11	12

12	12	I
13	I	'
14	'	3
3	4
16	•	5
17	5	6

,18.	7
.,	'	8
'

J	4
• 5
5	6

6 1

7 8

8 9
'	10
10	II

11	12

12 '	I
I	'
2	'
'	4
4	5

5	6

6	7

1	'
• '
• 10
10	11

5	6	7	8
6	1	8	9
1	s	9	10
8	9	10	11
• to	11	12
IU	11	12	I
11	12	1	2
12	I	'	J
I	'	J	'
'	J	4	5
'	4	5	6
4	5	6	7
i
I
I •	1	8	•
7 8	'	JO
8 9	10	II

9 10	11	12

JO	II	12	I

11	12	I	2

12	1	2	3
• 
JO	11
10 11	12
11 12	I

12 1	2

t	2	J
2	3	4

3	4	5
• 5	6
5	'	1
'	7	8
1	8	9
8	9	10
9 10	11

10 11	12

11 12	I
12 I	2
I	2	)
2	3	•
J	•	5
• 5	6

12

I 2 J
4
5	*
• 
'
8	*
'  *
10

11

12	*
I

2

3
• "'
5	*
• *
1	*

"	JO
I	"
I •U

2	"
2	30

3	0

J JO

'	"
'	JI)
5	0 '
5	JU
6	u

6	Jo

'	,,
'	,,
8	JO
'	"
9	'"
10	0

Rali Ra,i 1l&1i Rui

Ra•i

R¦sl

Rui

Rasi Rad

Rui

Rasi

Ra i

TABLES	11
SASTHYAMOSA CHAKRA (  )

.·
!1·:z
=-  1111..e!
z•

M"

Vrsa

Mi1h

K!l.rt

Sinb.
Kany

T,I

Vrsc

Dhn
Makr
Kom
Mina:<a -
<<

Amsi

Kala21910II11I
2J''''8*10lO
22
JO
II12I2
J''67'
9II0
23II12I2J•
,'6789JOIIJO2412I2J4
,6
78'10II120:5I
2J46'8'JOII12*12JO*"2
J4
,'
67''JOII12I*ll"--21J'67'9JOII12
I2*
13JO"•,
6
7
8'
JO
JI
12I
2
J"'
14
0..29'6'89
JO
1112I2J4.*.14JOJO6J''JO1112I2J4'"0*3178'10II12I
1J•'6*1530*328910II12I2J4'6'160*l39JOII12I2J4'67•
16lO*34IOII11I23
4l67
89170*35II12I2J4'6J8'10*11JO*
)612I1J4'
67••JOII18037I1
)4l67••10II12.1.8
lO"2J4'•'••10II12I..
0
.,"3•l678•10IIllI'*404'678•
JOII12I'
l200*41'67'•10IIlll'J•2030
RasiRa i
Ra1iRasi
RulRasiRuiRatiRulRuiRallRasi
12	HINDU 80!ENOE OF TIIE FUTURE


SASTHYAMGSA•CHAKRA ( 3)

.i .·a.•ii
z•
M"
Yrs¦

M11h

Kart

5inh

Kany

T,I
v,

Dho

Makr
K,m

Mi11a•.•-
.:!"'•
<•
.!
w••426
,7'9JOJI12I')''"0.•43'9101112I2l4''"JO44''101112I2'
4''7"
04S'iO1112I2'
4'
6
7••"JO46iOII12I''
4'6'''•2l047
.,1112I2J
4'
67•'
,0"3-012J2l•'67'9
IOII24
049I''''67'
9
10II12•2430502'
4''7••
10II"I25
0•"l•''7•
9
10II12I
2•25
JO"•'67''
10
1112
I
2'•"
053'67''
10II12I2''•"JOl467''10IIIZI''
4
,'•27
0"7''10II12l
2
34•l7
lO"•'
10JI
12\
2l4'•7"
0"910JI12
I'''5'
7•28JO"
IOII12l'l''6'•',".0•"II12l2l
4'•7•'10•
lO"'12I'l4'67•'
10...J.I•
JO•·Ra51RuiRHiRuilhaiRuiR11iRuiRuillHiRa1i Read the digit.I I, 2, l etc. in 1be following manne,1.1 meant Meu, 2 me1111 Vn,, 3 meant Mi1bu11e etc.
How to rend Sas1hyamsa cbakra? Say Ru•i'1degree i11 Mesa ii 1"•20'. Look a\ tba chart. you will nolice, tn the column Meaa after I" wit bin 1•.JO' tbe planet•• position It h1 lnt Rui I,•• iD MilbUDC, There it
11u mark a1ai1111 it. So ii it 1101 .in Krura rasi,Sur marked fiauret ia41cate 'Ktot1' ( cruel or verJ m1l1dicJ
n1i.

APPENDIX-A
Meth.. of Calculation ·
Hora la11111.	Metilod of calculation :-
We may show the process of calculation by a formula which
is this:
Birth time hours and minutes minus  Sunrise	hours and
minutes.
2nd atep:  The  resultant hours and minutes  are  to be
-converted into Jlari and amsa and kala (min).
Each hour ia equal to one raai.
Two minutes are equal to one amsa ( degree ). Two seconds are equal to one kala ( minute).
3rd step :  The aforesaid Rasi, amsa and kala etc, are to be
added to either kavisphuta or Chandrasphuta.
The result is Hora lagna.
When llul erChandr11phnta ls to he added 7
   If the lagna in the birthchart fall1 in a Visama ( odd J raai Ravisphuta and when lagna falls in a Sama ( even) rasi Chandrasphuta are to be added to the rasi, amsa etc worked out in the 2nd &tep.
Let us give an illustration :
Look at tile standard horoscope in Chapter II, page 71.
   The boy waa born at 4 hours 27 minutes 17 seconds after sunrise, which means 4 rasi 13 amsa ( or degree ) 38 kala ( or minute) 30 bikala ( or seconds ).
   A• the lagna is in Visama rasi (odd) Ravisphuta is to be added.
So,Hora lagna will be (4'-13"-38'-30"+0'-16°-18'-19')
4'-29°-56'-49".
Ghati lagna- ethod of calculation :-
   Find out Jata-danda. Divide Jata-danda and pala etc by 12. The remainder danda, pala should be converted into rasi and amsa etc. Here, each danda is equal to one rasi, two palas are equal to one amsa (degree), two bipalas are equal to one kala (minute).  Now, add  this newly found rasi, amsa etc to actual rasi, amsa, etc of lagnasphuta.  The result is Gbati !agna.

II IIINDU SCIBNCB OP THI! PUTUllB
   If the Jata-danda is less than 12 then division by 12 ia not necessary. This is a lagna quite different from Jata•lagna. But there will be no difference with regard to placement of planets in the birthchart.

Meaning of different digits In Arndha chakra
   See the diagram of Arudhapada (p 90). There are in different rasis no. I, 2, 3, etc to denote Lagoapada, Dhanapada, Sahajapada etc. This meana the I dijit is Lngnapada, 2 is Dhanapada, 3 is Sahajapada, 4 is Sukhapada etc.

Indian .Astrologer's dilemma :
   How to find oat lagna of a birth cbart when the natiYe is born Cllltside India, sucb as London or Newyork etc?
   The method of calculation is explained by a specific illustration.
   This is to be noted fiut that lagna-position is to be calculated according to the local mean time of tile place where the child ia born. Grahasphuta is to be calculated according to our (Indian) Panchanga ( Ephemeris) if the Ephemeris of the birth place i11, not a> ail able.
   lllustration I:  A boy was born on the 10th March, 1971 at l hrs 30 min ( A. M. ) at London.  According to Indian System 3 hrs 30 min at night on the 9th March.
Process of calculation :­ London longitude-0°-5' Calcutta	,,	-88°-23'
difference is ,,	-88° - 18'
Each degree is equal to 4 mins
   Therefore	88°-18'x4=5hrs53m 12secs.  London is west to Calcutta. So London time+5 hrs 53 m 12 secs i.e. 3 hn 30 m ( A. M. )+5 hrs 53 m 12 sec=9 hrs 23 m 12 secs A. M. ( Calcutta local mean time) or·s hrs 59 m 42 secs (Ind. St. Time) on the 10th March, 1971. I have already said that lagna is to be worked out according to London local mean time which is 3 hrs 30 m (A. MJ and grab.asphuta is to be calculated according to I, S. T.

IIIITBOD OP CALCULATION	ill
   llla¦tratlon Il :  Ir  the  boy was  born  at  Newyork (U. S. A.) on that day and at that time i.  at 3 hrs  30 m (A. M,) on the 10th March, procesa of calculation will be as foll J" s :
Calcutta longitude=		88°-23' Newyork	.,	=	73°-5&' By addition it comes to 162° -21'
Eachdearee	=	4min.  So,!62•-21•x4
=	10 hrs 48 min 21 Sec.
   T,,erefore this difference of time is to be added to the birth time of Newyork which is 14 hrs 18 min 21 sec ( L. M. T.)  P. M,
i.e. 3 hrs 30 min ( A. M. )+10 hrs 48 min 21 scc=l4 hrs II min 21 sec of the afternoon of the 10th March. This is Calcutta Local Mean Time which is equivalent to 13 hrs 54 min 511ec1 Indian Standard Time.
Another most Important point to be noted :
   U. S. A. and England have different time in different ptriod1 which are quoted hercbelow from N. C. Lahiri'• Table of Ascendants.

Period of Summer Time
   British Summer Time ( when clock time is 1 hr more than G. M. T.) changing at 2 A. M. G. M. T.


1980 Ap, U to Oct 6
1986 Apr 19 t,o Oc  4'
198'1 Apr 18 to Oct a 1938 Ap, lO to Ooi 1939 April 16 io No, 19
194,0 Fib 'JO fo Dec 91
• 19il wholl!I year
• 194\;I r.hole y¦ar
• 1943 whole year
• 1944. whole yeH
• 194.6 Jan 1 to Oct 7
1966 Apr U io Oci 8
• 194.f .14ar 16 $0 Nov '!l


HHS M,u H to Ocl 81 194'9 Apr 3 to Oc• 30
1950 Apr 16 to Oct !l
19:H Apr 15 k> Oct !11
195!1 Apr !10 o Oct 26
1953 Apr 19 to Oct 4
1954 Apr 11 to Oct 3
1955 Apr 17 to Oct 2
1956 Apr	to Oct 7
1957 A.pr 14 to Oci 6
1958 Apr !j0 to Oci 0
1969 Apr lg	Oc• 4
1960 Ap, 10 io Ocl
1981 lbr !lo lo Ooi 9


1962 Mar 215 k> Oct !19
1963 Mar 31 to Oct 27 1g:u Mar 2\J tl Oct !15 1965 Mar 21 to Oct
1966 M:a.r 20 to Oct 23
1967 Mar 19 MJ ODt 29
1968 Feb 18 io Dec 31
1969 whole year
1970 whole yiar
1971 lill Oct 31
1972 Mar 19 k> Od
19'i3 Mar 18 to Od  8
1974 ?dar l'l to Oct !17 1976 liar 16io Ocl!le.

HINDU SCIBNCB OP THI! PUTUl:B

• Double Summer Time (when clock time. ia 2  hr more than
G. M. T.l


1941 May 4 to Aug 10
1942 Apr 5 to Aug 9
1943 Apr 4 to Aug 15

1944 Apr 2 to Sept 17
1945 Apr 2 to July 15
1947 Apr 13 to Aug 10

   From 1973 onward Summer Time observed is from 2 A. M. of Sunday following the third Saturday in March to 2 A. M. of the day following the fourth Sunday in October.
In North America (U.S. A., Canada and Mexico) the following
Standard Times are maintained :
Normal Standard Time	During Summer Season•

Atlantic time-4hr AST-3  hr ADTEastern time-5hr EST-4hrEDTCentral time-6hr CST-5hr CDTMountain time-7hr MST-6hr MDTPacific time-8hr PST-7hr PDT   The cities of Newyork, Washington D. C., Philadelphia, Boston, Quebec, Toronto, Ottowa, Montreal etc. fall in the Eastern Time zone. Indian Standard Time is 101/2 hrs in advance of the normal Standard Time of this zone.
   Summer time or Day light Saving time i• introduced from t A. M. of last Sunday in April and withdrawn from 2 A. M. of last Sunday in October, during which period clocks are advanced by one hour.
   lo U.S. S. R. the Standard time observed varies from +3 hr to + 13 hr. Originally the European Countries like Irish Republic, France, Belgium, Portugal, Spain etc, observed G. M. T. al the Standard time of the country. During the period of the 1econd world war, their clock, were advanced by one hour for the purpose of Day Light Saving as was done in Great Britain.
This system of iime is still being continued in these countries although Britain bas since reat<'rcd to G. M. r. except for
Summer Time.  ( Quoted  from Table  of  Ascendanta  b:, N. C. Lahirl)

APPENDIX-8

Dreams-A Mystery

   The Agni Purana a sacred book of Hindus instructs the image­ maker to pray on, the night before he begins his work as­ follows :-
"O, Lord of all the Gods teach me in dreams to carry out the
work I have in mind."
   Closely similar	to the prayer in the Agni Purana is the· following	from Tibetan yoga & secret doctrines edited by E,ans-arntz :
   "Then at night, when about to sleep pray to the guru that thou ma)est be enabled to comprehend the drearn-state, and firmly resolve that thou wilt comprehend it. By meditating· thus, one is certain to comprehend it.
   In the second practice, cemprehcnding it by the power or· breath, the methods arc: sleep on the rigbtside as a lion doth. With the thumb and ring finger of the right hand press the pulsation of the throat arteries, stop the nostrils with the fingers. ( of the left band ) ; let the saliva collect in throat.
   As a result of these		methods, the yogin enjoys a vivid consciousness in the dream-state as in the waking state ; and in paasing from one state to another experiences no break in the continuity of memory. Thereby the content of the oream-state is found to be quite the same as that of the		waking-state,. in that it is wholly	phenomenal	and,	therefore illusory. All the multitudinous forms, botb inorganic and organic, existing in nature, including the forms of men and of gods, arc found to be purely phenomenal, and thus, in themsclv<s,. non-real. So dream-experiences and waking-experiences alike· are discovered to be like mirage or-like the image of the moon, 1ecn reflected in water. The yogin's aim is to attain to the causal or nonmcnal state wherein alone can thereby realisatio of Reality,"
   The reader may try the second practice described above, for himself. He will discover certain thin11 for himself, The practitc ii worth-tryin1, caay and harmlc11.
27

•I	HINDU SOIBNOB OP THB POlrUBB

This is perhaps a little more positive than what Shakespear,
·meant in his famous lines, "We are 1uch stuff Bl  dreams an
made on, and our little life is rounded with a 1leep."
   And let it not be forgotten that from the  visions or dream1, if you w,11, of Joan of Arc, come the rescue of feudal France from the grip of England-also that John Bunyan was called the "Mad Dreamer" after he had written his immortal Pilgrim• Progre11 and nearer still, to modern times, Coleridge claimed to have written his poetical fragment Kublakhan from a dream.
   The theory that dreams are just events casting their ahadows before has been re-enforced in our own times by the scientific ideas of serialism 1et forth by the Cambridge mathematician Dunne.  But there are other theories as well, less philosophical or scientific and more prosaic : "Children of the night of indigestion bred" observes one theorist. "A world of the dead in the hues of life", says another. "We are somewhat more than ourselves  in our sleeps and the &lumber of the body seems to be but tho w,king of the soul.  It is the litigation of sense but the liberty of reason and our waking conceptions do not match the fancies of our sleeps." ( Sir J. Browne )
There is a different way of  putting the basic philosophy or
,erialism, long before Dunne.
But apart from theories, of which there is no end-they begin
·beyond Plato from  the fact, of the Bible, or beyond even that
.and there still ''lcumen in"-the important question remains why do some dream, come true? There ia hardly any aatiafying answer to it. It is a mystery.
Least mystifying, how ver, is the an,wer which Bernard Shaw
puts in the mouth of Joan of Arc when charged with accusation
.tb.at her dream voices "come from your imagination,"
  Of course she replie•, "that is how messages of God do come to us."
   "Nobody", writes Shaw, "disputes that the relief of Orleans followed by the coronation of the Dauphin at Rbeima   wen
military and political master-stroke• that saved France. They migb.t have been planned by Napoleonic or any other illu1ion­ pr.,of aenious."
Yet a,  everybody  knows Joan waa a youn1 pea1ant maid
unlearned and unversed in either war or politic¦,

-vii

   The probability seems to be that man i• a multi-lazared being and though. ninetynine percent of dream• may be straight• forward enough and altogether unproblematic, there are always a few dreams which seem to be utterly straoge a, if tb,y were trying to tell something, that i• to convey a sort of message. Jung in his Memories, Dreams, Reji ections records some such feelings in tb.c chapter wllich he calls "confront..tion with the unconscious". He describes a dream in whicb. the corpses in a row of tomb, seemed to come back to life, a, he looked at them. Then he describes a sort of sense of oppression he was passing through-it was the Autumn of 1913, a little before 1he first world war started-and then a vision.  It was that of a mighty flood covering the whole and large tracts of land between the North Sea and the Alps and of mountains getting higher and higher to thwart ii and countless floating dead b,,dies in the H.ood which had become metamorphosed into flood. The vision returned two weeks later and he heard a  voice that said "Look at it well: it is wholly real."  Sometime af1er, he had dreams of an Artie cold wave freezing the world. The vis1.on came again for the third time.
   He realised only later that the dreams had b,en prophetic. '1We have in dreams" writes Winslow, •·No true perception of time-a strange property of mind ! F..r, if •uch be also its property when entered into the eternal disembodied state, time will appear to us Eternity !  The realisations of space as well as of time are also annihilated so that, wnile almost an eternity is compressed into a moment infinite spac is traversed more 1wif1ly than by real thought."
   Students of Hindu Philosophy particularly of the Philosophy of Yogavashista Ramayana wilt discover considtrable similarity between the above and his own studies.
   "Nothing so much convinces me the b,0undhssoess of the human mind as its operations in dreaming", wriks a philosopher and tbis may be read along with the fol!ov.ing: "!)reaming is an act of pure imagination, attesting in all men a creative power which if it wero available in wakin6, would make every man a
Dante and a Shakespeare.'" ( Hedge )
  Freud d1v1ded dreams into two classes; latent dream, or personal wi,hes which might or .might not be fulfilled in the

IIIND. 80IBM0B OP DB	l'OTUBB

-dream :  and  manifest droama,  those  in which the dreamer
-either participated in some action or wa¦simply a witnc11 to it. Of these the latter are of course more significant. They may be "Message Dreams", warning of experiences to come or just pictures of events that have already taken place. 1 be latter are mostly attributed to supernatural influences.
   The ancients believed in dreams with a kind of reverence and awe. The Scriptures say: "God speaketb once, yet twice, yet man perceived it not. In a dream, in a vision of the night when deep sleep fallen upon man in slumbering upon the bed, then H• opcneth the ears of men and sealeth their instruction."
In the Old Testament, God thus spoke to' Moses "Here now
my words irthere be a  prophet among you!  I, the lord, will
-m,ke myself known to him in a vision and will speak to him in
.,a dream."
   Thus the ancients looked upon dreams as direct message• from God and regarded angels as His chosen messengers; When Jacob dreamed, he saw a ladder and the angels of God ascendin1 and discending upon it.
The  Biblical story of the dreams of the Pharaoh of Egypt ia
too well-known to be repeated.
   Another Biblical ruler Nebuchadnezzar dreamed that be saw a great i1J1&ge of gold, silver, brass, iron and clay and Daniel interpreted the dream which conveyed a message. Throughout the aa,g writers and pbi101opbers bad devoted much attention
<o,dreams,
   The Greeka firmly believed in dreams and regarded them aa commands from the gods of Olympus, sent to man by Zeus, the father of the gods, through His messenger Hermes ( in Latia Mercury). Amongst the lesser gods were Hypros (sleep), Oneiro1
, ( Dreams ) aud Tbauatos (Dea1b) ; so dreams were taken as the
domain of a god.
   The Greek philosopb.ers of course attributed material and pb.ysical causes to dreams-disorders of the liver, which was then held to be the seat of passions and of appeti1e, bod,ly strain due to overwork. But Plato, Aristotle, Democretus and Ga,ui were never 'popular' as 'popiilari1y• bas boen understood in· variou1 epot.lhs.

DRBAMB-A MYSTERY	ix
   Interpretation of dreams has been the philosopher's job through centuries. In Hindu sacred lore; the Brahmavaivarta Purana devoted attention to this, while, in the West thename of Artemidoru:, is conspicuous. He lived in the reign of Autominus of Rome and wrote a book on dreams which was translated in later times by Rigaltius, an edition of which was published in 1604.
   Artemidorus did not concoct the interpretations but compiled them from the lessons of antiquity.
   Racial or inherited, accumulated memory or the stored-up impressions in the mind, which are assumed to be transmitted down through the ages for countless generations, are said to account for many dreams. When we sleep, the remembrance of things long past surges back again and produces the dreams. And naturally, those dreams are the most difficult to explain. Through them, we live again fragments of lives of our ancestors in the dim, distant past.
   Some dreams again are said to be caused or inlluenced by departed spirits-the "shades of women and of men, who have lived and have died and are living again." For this reason, religion enjoins that, before going to sleep, one should .pray,- so that the spiritual defence against evil spirits is fought into action.
   A further complication is introduced by the concept of re-incarnation.
   It is most interesting and potentialities of this theory arc immense. But, unless tho modern studies in para-psychology, are more persuative and convincing, orthodox science continues to be indifferent. Hindu scriptures are full of illustrations of this line of explanation for dreams : but they belong to the reader of forgotten knowledge, of which, alas, there is no lack in India.
  One would therefore conclude on the note that dreams arc a mystery, nett yet fully explained, they are on the twilight ot understanding-interesting and significant all the time, but hardly fully intelligible, therein possibly lies the attractiveness of it all.

.,	HINDU SOIENOB OF :tEB FU:tUBE
   The following points would however sum up a safe guide line to go by,
   Our dreams at least those which are more meaningful or siginficant than the rest, are those in which we the dreamers are both apectators and participants.
   Frequently they are distorted impression• of experiences remote or recent. If remote, they may be too remote for explaining.
   As in the mirrors, so a,so, frequently in dreams, we aee our thoughts in reverse gear, so th.at the popular sayiog that "dreams go by contraries'' is thereby confirmed.
   But in any case, dreams, it is worth repeating, remain a mystery in both space anc'. time. And some of those may very truly be trembling at what T. S. Eliot calls the "intersection of the timeless moment" with time or at the intersection of the sub-conscious with the conscious. And, not only spiritually but also in the Art, Literature and Music, they have been great creative forces. The musicia , the painter, the writer, the architect, 1culptor and the poet may all have their waking dreams, but in some cases the end products of sleep dream have been great. R. N. Stevenson's wonderful story of Jekyll and Hyde was a dream.
   To sum up, Defoe wrote in 1726: "So dream is nothing else but to ateep thinking". And this may be taken as the texts our modern theories of the sub-conscious have built upon. And even to-day, this is about as far as we can safely go.

